.Dd March 28, 2022
.Dt PORTABILITY 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm portability
.Nd standard library portability information
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This manual documents replacements for interfaces not available in the standard
library or with special portability notes.
.Pp
Software written for other operating systems can be ported by replacing uses of
obsolete interfaces with the modern replacements and working around any missing
functionality.
The standard library attemps to implement the relevant parts of the C and POSIX
standards with useful extensions and tends to omit non-standard extensions found
on other operating systems whenever standard interfaces exists.
.Ss alloca
.Xr alloca 3
and variable length arrays are implemented by the compiler, however the main
thread stack size is fixed and does not grow unlike other operating systems, and
large stack uses should instead use
.Xr malloc 3
or set the stack size explicitly for another thread using
.Xr pthread_attr_setstacksize 2 .
.Ss asctime, asctime_r
.Xr strftime 3
is the standard replacement.
.Ss bcopy
.Xr memcpy 3
is the standard replacement.
Note how the order of the source and destination parameters is swapped.
.Ss bzero
.Xr memset 3
is the standard replacement.
.Ss caddr_t
.Vt void *
is the standard type.
.Ss clock
.Xr clock 3
is implemented but can overflow, and
.Xr clock_gettime 2
.Dv CLOCK_PROCESS_CPUTIME_ID
is the modern replacement with nanosecond precision.
.Ss ctime, ctime_r
.Xr strftime 3
is the standard replacement.
.Ss daemon
Daemons should not background by double forking but rather stay in the
foreground as described in
.Xr daemon 7
and be managed by
.Xr init 8 .
.Ss __dead
.Dv noreturn
from
.In stdnoreturn.h
is the modern standard replacement or the
.Sy __attribute__((noreturn))
extension can be used.
.Ss flock, fcntl F_UNLCK, F_WRLCK, F_GETLK, F_SETLK, F_SETLKW, lockf
POSIX advisory locks are not implemented due to their flawed design of being
process-wide instead of being per file description.
The superior
.Xr flock 2
is not currently implemented.
It might be safe enough to omit the file locking as a workaround.
.Ss ftime
.Xr clock_gettime 2
is the standard replacement.
.Ss getdtablesize
The file descriptor table is unbounded and file descriptors above a certain
value can be closed using
.Xr closefrom 2
and iterated using
.Xr psctl 2 .
.Ss getgroups, setgroups, initgroups
Supplementary groups are not implemented yet.
It may be possible to remove invocations as a workaround.
.Ss gethostbyaddr
.Xr getnameinfo 3
is the standard modern replacement.
.Ss gethostbyname
.Xr getaddrinfo 3
is the standard modern replacement.
.Ss getitimer, setitimer
.Xr timer_create 2
is the modern standard replacement.
.Ss getpgrp, setpgrp
.Xr getpgid 3
and
.Xr setpgid 3
are the standard portable replacements without disagreement on the function
signatures.
.Ss getresgid, getresuid, setresgid, setresuid
These are not implemented yet as multi-user security is not yet implemented
in this operating system.
The kernel does not have a saved uid and saved gid concept at this time.
The
.Xr getuid 2 ,
.Xr getgid 2 ,
.Xr geteuid 2 ,
.Xr getegid 2 ,
.Xr setuid 2 ,
.Xr setgid 2 ,
.Xr seteuid 2 ,
and
.Xr setegid 2
system calls can be used to retrieve and manipulate the implemented concepts as
a workaround.
.Ss gettimeofday
.Xr gettimeofday 2
is implemented but the second parameter is defunct and is typed
.Vt void *
per POSIX instead of
.Vt struct timezone * .
.Xr clock_gettime 2
is the modern replacement with nanosecond precision.
.Ss gid_t
.Vt gid_t
is 64-bit unsigned and can be formatted portably cast to a
.Vt uintmax_t
using
.Dq %ju .
.Ss inet_addr, inet_aton
.Xr inet_pton 3
and
.Xr getaddrinfo 3
are the modern standard replacements, however they don't support the unusual
IPv4 notations.
.Ss inet_ntoa
.Xr inet_ntop 3
and
.Xr getnameinfo 3
are the modern standard replacements.
.Ss <limits.h>
.In limits.h
is currently implemented by the compiler instead of the standard library and it
does not define everything required by POSIX.
.In sortix/limits.h
can be included instead as a temporary workaround if the required definitions
are absent.
.Ss makedev, major, minor
The kernel does not have a concept of major and minor device numbers.
.Ss mkfifo
.Xr mkfifo 2
named pipes are not currently implemented but unnamed pipes are available using
.Xr pipe 2 ,
or alternatively
.Dv AF_UNIX
sockets can be used instead.
.Ss mknod
Devices in the
.Pa /dev
filesystem are created by the kernel and cannot be manually created.
.Ss mmap
.Xr mmap 2
is implemented, but
.Dv MAP_SHARED
shared memory mappings are not implemented yet.
.Ss off_t
.Vt off_t
is 64-bit signed and can be formatted portably cast to an
.Vt intmax_t
using
.Dq %jd .
.Ss PATH_MAX
The
.Dv PATH_MAX
limit does not currently exist and may be added in the future.
Applications should be written as if this limit does not exist, but if required,
it can be defined to 4096 as a fallback.
.Ss pid_t
.Vt pid_t
is 64-bit signed and can be formatted portably cast to an
.Vt intmax_t
using
.Dq %jd .
.Ss poll
.Xr poll 2
is implemented in
.In poll.h
per POSIX, however some operating systems have a
.In sys/poll.h
alias which is not implemented.
.Ss posix_close
.Xr close 2
should be used instead.
POSIX 2024 defined this replacement interface because some broken legacy
operating systems could fail with
.Ev EINTR
in
.Xr close 2
on slow devices,
instead of returning 0 and either completing the operating in the background
or aborting it.
However, this means most programs need to be updated to use the more
complicated alternative function instead for no practical gain, which isn't
going to happen.
The standard has added a lot of complexity where none needs to exist, which
is rejected in this operating system.
.Xr close 2
never fails with
.Ev EINTR on this operating system.
.Ss posix_devctl
.Xr ioctl 2
should be used instead.
POSIX 2024 defined this optional function as a replacement for
.Xr ioctl 2
but never defined any way for portable applications to actually use it.
The
.Fa dev_info_ptr
parameter is especially useless as its semantics are not defined, and often
the desired output does not necessarily fit in an int type.
The
.Xr ioctl 2
interface is fine and this alternative function is rejected in this operating
system as it is optional in POSIX 2024.
.Ss posix_getdents
.Xr readdir 3
should be used instead.
.Xr readdirents 2
is a similar Sortix-specific system call that will likely be replaced with
something else in the future.
This new
.Ft posix_getdents
function is due to a mess of diverent
.Fn getdents
functions.
It is unfortunate they used
.Vt struct posix_dent
instead of
.Vt struct dirent
as they did not want to mandate the addition of the common
.Vt d_type
field in
.Vt struct dirent .
However,
.Vt posix_getdents
is decent and may be implemented in the future.
.Ss printf
.Xr printf 3
is implemented, however floating point formatting is not currently implemented
and the format specifier will instead be output verbatim.
Position parameters are also not implemented yet.
.Ss pthread_cancel
Pthread cancellation is not implemented and threads instead have to
.Xr pthread_exit 3
voluntarily.
.Ss pthread_kill
Sending a signal to a particular thread is not implemented.
.Ss putenv
.Xr setenv 3
is the standard replacement.
Note how the string provided could technically be modified at a later time.
.Ss rand, srand
.Xr rand 3
and
.Xr srand 3
are implemented, however invocations will warn that the functions are not
random, and
.Xr arc4random 3 ,
.Xr arc4random_uniform 3 ,
or
.Xr arc4random_buf 3
should be used instead for random numbers.
.Ss realpath
.Xr realpath 3
with a non-null second parameter is undefined behavior as there is no
.Dv PATH_MAX
limit, and should always be invoked with a null second parameter which allocates
a destination buffer of the appropriate size using
.Xr malloc 3 .
.Ss <resolv.h>
.In resolv.h
is currently not implemented and
.Xr getaddrinfo 2
can be used instead.
.Ss sbrk
.Xr malloc 3
and
.Xr mmap 2
are the standard interfaces for memory allocation.
.Ss select
.Xr select 2
is implemented, but is defined in
.In sys/select.h
instead of
.In sys/time.h
per POSIX, however the superior
.Xr poll 2
should be used instead as the
.Vt fdset_t
type overflows on file descriptors whose value is too large.
.Ss sigaction SA_RESTART
Restarting system calls after signal delivery is not currently implemented and
system calls instead fail with
.Er EINTR .
.Ss socklen_t
.Vt socklen_t
is typedef to
.Vt size_t
instead of
.Vt int
or
.Vt unsigned int
as on other operating systems.
.Ss sprintf
.Xr sprintf 3
is implemented, however invocations will warn the function is dangerous as it
does not know the size of the destination buffer and may buffer overflow if the
output is unexpectedly large.
.Xr snprintf 3
should be use instead as the destination buffer size should always be known,
otherwise the invocation is suspicious.
The superior alternative is to combine allocation and initialization using
.Xr asprintf 3 .
.Ss <sys/param.h>
.In sys/param.h
is not implemented as there is little agreement on what it's supposed to contain
and all the contents have standard replacements or can be provided by the
application itself.
Inclusions are almost always unnecessary and can be removed.
.Ss times
.Xr times 2
is implemented, however the
.Vt clock_t
type may overflow, and the
.Xr timens 2
non-standard extension with
.Vt struct timespec
precision can be used instead.
.Ss time_t
.Vt time_t
is 64-bit signed and can be formatted portably cast to an
.Vt intmax_t
using
.Dq %ji
or with
.Xr strftime 3
and such.
.Pp
.Dv CLOCK_REALTIME
counts the number of seconds since the epoch including leap seconds, unlike
other operating systems and in violation of POSIX.
.Dv CLOCK_REALTIME_HAS_LEAP_SECONDS
definition advertises
.Dv CLOCK_REALTIME
contains leap seconds since the epoch in the TAI-10 format.
.Pp
.Xr sub_leap_seconds 3
converts timestamps from TAI-10 to UTC by subtracting the leap seconds, while
.Xr add_leap_seconds 3
converts timestamps from UTC TO TAI-10 by adding the leap seconds.
These functions are useful when communicating with other operating systems
either via the network or exchanged data files.
.Ss u_char, u_short, u_int, u_long
.Vt unsigned char ,
.Vt unsigned short ,
.Vt unsigned int ,
and
.Vt unsigned long
are the standard types.
Applications can supply the typedefs themselves if desired.
.Ss uid_t
.Vt uid_t
is 64-bit unsigned and can be formatted portably cast to a
.Vt uintmax_t
using
.Dq %ju .
.Ss u_int8_t, u_int16_t, u_int32_t, u_int64_t
.Vt uint8_t ,
.Vt uint16_t ,
.Vt uint32_t ,
and
.Vt uint64_t
are the standard types.
Applications can supply the typedefs themselves if desired.
.Ss wait3, wait4
.Xr waitpid 2
is the standard replacement.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr porting 7
