.Dd February 24, 2018
.Dt RELEASE-ISO-BOOTCONFIG 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm release-iso-bootconfig
.Nd release .iso bootloader configuration
.Sh DESCRIPTION
You can customize the bootloader configuration of a release .iso by adding your
own
.Pa /boot/grub/hooks.cfg
to the .iso filesystem as part of the
.Xr release-iso-modification 7
procedure.
This manual page details the programming interface available when writing this
file.
.Pp
Commonly a custom
.Pa /boot/grub/hooks.cfg
would take some actions when loaded (such as setting variables)
and define hook functions as described in the
.Sx Hooks
subsection to inject behavior in certain locations, and otherwise make use of
the facilities described in this manual page.
.Ss Ports and Binary Packages
The release .iso contains binary packages.
The ports menu controls what binary packages are installed in the live
environment.
.Ss Port Sets
The binary packages menu controls what binary packages have a copy stored in the
.Pa /repository
directory inside the live environment.
.Pp
Sets of ports and binary packages are defined by
.Pa build-aux/ports.conf
in the source code:
.Bl -tag -width "12345678"
.It Sy all
All ports.
.It Sy basic
Common software and everything needed to develop the operating system
.It Sy minimal
Ports needed to successfully install and upgrade the operating system.
.It Sy no
No ports.
.El
.Ss Configuration Files
The bootloader configuration consists of these GRUB configuration files that you
can use or overwrite as desired:
.Bl -tag -width "12345678"
.It Pa /boot/grub/grub.cfg
The GRUB bootloader will load its configuration by loading this file.
.Pp
First, this file loads the default bootloader configuration by taking the following
actions:
.Pp
It defines no-operation versions of each of the hook functions defined below.
.Pp
It loads the appropriate GRUB modules.
.Pp
It initializes the global variable described below.
.Pp
It defines functions to select each set of ports and binary package, as
described below.
.Pp
Secondly, it loads
.Pa /boot/grub/hooks.cfg
(if it exists)
which can take any actions it wants and customize the default configuration.
.Pp
Finally, it loads
.Pa /boot/grub/main.cfg
to display the menu menu.
.It Pa /boot/grub/hooks.cfg
This file provides additional bootloader configuration if it exists.
.Pp
This file is loaded (if it exists) by
.Pa /boot/grub/grub.cfg
after the default bootloader configuration has been loaded.
The bootloader configuration is designed to be customized by setting the
variables defined below, defining any of the hook functions defined below, or
any other desired actions.
.It Pa /boot/grub/main.cfg
This file displays the main bootloader menu by taking the following actions:
.Pp
The
.Sy menu_title
variable is set to the contents of the
.Sy base_menu_title
variable.
.Pp
The
.Sy hook_menu_pre
hook is run.
.Pp
Menu entries are emitted for the live environment, the installer, and the
upgrader.
.Pp
The live environment menu entry runs:
.Li load_sortix -- /sbin/init --target=single-user
.Pp
The installer menu entry runs:
.Li load_sortix -- /sbin/init --target=sysinstall
.Pp
The upgrader menu entry runs:
.Li load_sortix -- /sbin/init --target=sysupgrade
.Pp
Menu entries are emitted for the ports selection bootloader menu (which runs
.Li configfile /boot/grub/ports.cfg )
and the advanced bootloader menu (which runs
.Li configfile /boot/grub/advanced.cfg )
.Pp
Finally the
.Sy hook_menu_post
hook is run.
.It Pa /boot/grub/advanced.cfg
This file displays the advanced bootloader menu by taking the following actions:
.Pp
A menu entry is emitted that goes back to the main menu (which runs
.Li configfile /boot/grub/main.cfg )
.Pp
The
.Sy menu_title
variable is set to the contents of the
.Sy base_menu_title
variable appended with " - Advanced Options".
.Pp
The
.Sy hook_advanced_menu_pre
hook is run.
.Pp
A menu entry is emitted to control whether network drivers are enabled.
.Pp
A menu entry is emitted that goes to the binary packages menu (which runs
.Li configfile /boot/grub/tix.cfg )
.Pp
Finally, the
.Sy hook_advanced_menu_post
hook is run.
.It Pa /boot/grub/ports.cfg
This file displays the port selection bootloader menu by taking the following
actions:
.Pp
A menu entry is emitted that goes back to the main menu (which runs
.Li configfile /boot/grub/main.cfg )
.Pp
The
.Sy menu_title
variable is set to the contents of the
.Sy base_menu_title
variable appended with " - Ports".
.Pp
The
.Sy hook_ports_menu_pre
hook is run.
.Pp
The following menu entries implicitly run
.Li configfile /boot/grub/ports.cfg
afterwards to return to this menu.
.Pp
A menu entry is emitted that loads all ports by running
.Sy select_ports_set_all .
.Pp
The
.Sy hook_ports_menu_pre
hook is run.
.Pp
Menu entries are emitted for each of the port sets, each of which load only
those ports set by running
.Sy select_ports_set_ Ns Ar $set .
.Pp
A menu entry is emitted that loads no ports by running
.Sy select_ports_set_no .
.Pp
The
.Sy hook_ports_menu
hook is run.
.Pp
Menu entries are emitted for each port, each stating whether that port will be
loaded, and selecting such a menu entry will toggle whether the port is loaded
by setting
.Sy port_ Ns Ar $set
variable to
.Sy true
or
.Sy false .
.Pp
Finally, the
.Sy hook_ports_menu_post
hook is run.
.It Pa /boot/grub/tix.cfg
This file displays the binary packages selection bootloader menu by taking the
following actions:
.Pp
A menu entry is emitted that goes back to the advanced menu (which runs
.Li configfile /boot/grub/advanced.cfg )
.Pp
The
.Sy menu_title
variable is set to the contents of the
.Sy base_menu_title
variable appended with " - Binary Packages".
.Pp
The
.Sy hook_tix_menu_pre
hook is run.
.Pp
The following menu entries implicitly run
.Li configfile /boot/grub/tix.cfg
afterwards to return to this menu.
.Pp
A menu entry is emitted that loads all binary packages by running
.Sy select_tix_set_all .
.Pp
The
.Sy hook_tix_menu_pre
hook is run.
.Pp
Menu entries are emitted for each of the binary package sets, each of which load
only those binary packages set by running
.Sy select_tix_set_ Ns Ar $set .
.Pp
A menu entry is emitted that loads no binary packages by running
.Sy select_tix_set_no .
.Pp
The
.Sy hook_tix_menu
hook is run.
.Pp
Menu entries are emitted for each binary package, each stating whether that
binary package will be loaded, and selecting such a menu entry will toggle
whether the binary package is loaded
by setting
.Sy tix_ Ns Ar $set
variable to
.Sy true
or
.Sy false .
.Pp
Finally, the
.Sy hook_tix_menu_post
hook is run.
.El
.Ss Variables
In addition to the standard GRUB variables, the following global variables are
set in
.Pa /boot/grub/grub.cfg :
.Bl -tag -width "12345678"
.It Sy base_menu_title
The base menu title which is used to construct the menu titles for each of the
menus by setting the
.Sy menu_title
variable.
The main menu uses this title verbatim, while the other menus will append
" -
.Ar menu_name Ns
" when constructing
.Sy menu_title.
(Default: "Sortix $version for $machine")
.It Sy default
Select this bootloader menu option number by default (counting from 0).
If the selected menu option itself is a submenu, it can be appended with a
.Sy '>'
and another selection to pick a default menu option in that submenu, and so on.
(Default: 0)
.It Sy enable_network_drivers
An additional
.Xr kernel 7
command line parameter that controls whether network drivers are enabled.
Either set to the empty string (network drivers are enabled) or
.Sy --disable-network-drivers .
(Default: The empty string).
.It Sy enable_src
Whether to load the source code initrd containing
.Pa /src .
(Default:
.Sy true )
.It Sy machine
The machine type this release was built for.
.It Sy menu_title
The menu title to display above the bootloader menu.
(Default: "$base_menu_title")
.It Sy no_random_seed
An additional command line parameter passed to the
.Xr kernel 7
turning off the warning about lack of entropy if there is no random seed.
This variable defaults to
.Sy --no-random-seed
if
.Pa /boot/random.seed
doesn't exist, otherwise it defaults to the empty string.
.It Sy port_ Ns Ar $port
The
.Ar port
is installed into live environment if this variable is set to
.Sy true
and not if set to
.Sy false .
(Default:
.Sy true )
.It Sy timeout
The time in seconds before the default menu entry (according to the
.Sy default
variable) is automatically selected.
If set to 0, the default menu entry is loaded instantaneously.
The timeout is disabled if set to -1.
(Default: 10)
.It Sy tix_ Ns Ar $port
A copy of the binary package is stored in
.Pa /repository
in the live environment if this variable is set to
.Sy true
and not if set to
.Sy false .
(Default:
.Sy true )
.It Sy version
The version number of this release.
.El
.Ss Functions
In addition to the standard GRUB functions, the following functions are set in
.Pa /boot/grub/grub.cfg :
.Bl -tag -width "12345678"
.It Sy load_base
This function loads the base system into the live environment by taking the
following actions:
.Pp
If this is x86_64 system, check using
.Li cpuid -l
whether the processor supports 64-bit mode and error if not.
.Pp
Run the
.Sy hook_kernel_pre
hook.
.Pp
Load
.Pa /boot/sortix.bin.xz
as a multiboot kernel,
with a
.Xr kernel 7
command line consisting of
.Sy $no_random_seed
.Sy $enable_network_drivers
followed by the arguments to this function (which should contain
.Li "-- /sbin/init --target=desired-target" )
followed by any additional options to
.Xr init 8 .
.Pp
Run the
.Sy hook_kernel_post
hook.
.Pp
If
.Sy no_random_seed
is not set to
.Sy --no-random-seed ,
load
.Pa /boot/random.seed
as a multiboot module with the
.Li --random-seed
command line.
.Pp
Load
.Pa /boot/system.initrd.xz ,
.Pa /boot/src.initrd.xz
(if
.Sy $enable_src ) ,
.Pa /boot/live.initrd.xz ,
and
.Pa /boot/overlay.initrd.xz
(only if a
.Pa sysroot-overlay
directory existed when making the release .iso)
as multiboot modules without any command line.
.Pp
Run the
.Sy hook_initrd_post
hook.
.It Sy load_ports
Load the ports and binary packages into the live environment by taking the
following actions:
.Pp
Run the
.Sy hook_ports_pre
hook.
.Pp
For each port, if
.Sy tix_ Ns Ar $port
is
.Sy true ,
then load the port as a binary package by running:
.Bd -literal
    module --nounzip /repository/$port.tix.tar.xz \\
           --to /repository/$port.tix.tar.xz
.Ed
And if
.Sy port_ Ns Ar $port
is
.Sy true ,
then install the port into the live environment by running:
.Bd -literal
    module /repository/$port.tix.tar.xz --tix
.Ed
.Pp
Run the
.Sy hook_ports_post
hook.
.It Sy load_sortix
Load the base system and ports into the live environment by running
.Sy load_base
with the given arguments and then run
.Sy load_ports .
.It Sy select_ports_set_ Ns Ar $set
Install only the ports that belong to the ports set
.Ar set .
Run the
.Sy hook_port_set Ns Ar $set
hook afterwards.
.It Sy select_tix_set_ Ns Ar $set
Load only the binary packages that belong to the ports set
.Ar set .
Run the
.Sy hook_tix_set Ns Ar $set
hook afterwards.
.El
.Ss Hooks
The following hooks are run by the GRUB bootloader configuration:
.Bl -tag -width "12345678"
.It Sy hook_advanced_menu_post
After the advanced menu entries have been emitted.
.It Sy hook_advanced_menu_pre
Before the advanced menu entries are emitted.
.It Sy hook_initrd_post
After the initrd is loaded.
.It Sy hook_kernel_post
After the kernel has been loaded.
.It Sy hook_kernel_pre
Before the kernel is loaded and before the initrd is loaded.
.It Sy hook_menu_post
After the main menu entries have been emitted.
.It Sy hook_menu_pre
Before the main menu entries are emitted.
.It Sy hook_ports_menu
After the port sets menu entries have been emitted and before the individual
port menu entires are emitted as a way to define additional ports to be loaded
or not.
.It Sy hook_ports_menu_post
After the ports selection menu entries have been emitted.
.It Sy hook_ports_menu_pre
Before the ports selection menu entries are emitted.
.It Sy hook_ports_menu_sets
After the "Load all ports" menu entry has been emitted as a place to define
additional sets to be loaded.
.It Sy hook_ports_post
After the ports and binary packages have been loaded.
.It Sy hook_ports_pre
Before the ports and binary packages are loaded.
.It Sy hook_ports_set_ Ns Ar $set
After the menu entry has been picked that chooses the given
.Ar set
of ports and the port variables have been updated.
.It Sy hook_tix_menu
After the binary packages sets menu entries have been emitted and before the
individual binary packages menu entires are emitted as a way to define
additional binary packages to be loaded or not.
.It Sy hook_tix_menu_post
After the binary packages selection menu entries have been emitted.
.It Sy hook_tix_menu_pre
Before the binary packages selection menu entries are emitted.
.It Sy hook_tix_menu_sets
After the "Load all binary packages" menu entry has been emitted as a place to
define additional sets to be loaded.
.It Sy hook_tix_set_ Ns Ar $set
After the menu entry has been picked that chooses the given
.Ar set
of binary packages and the binary packages variables have been updated.
.El
.Pp
For more information on the GRUB configuration file format and the available
commands, see the GRUB manual.
.Sh EXAMPLES
Adding the port
.Sy foo
to the
.Sy basic
and
.Sy all
port sets can be done with this
.Pa /boot/grub/hooks.cfg :
.Bd -literal
port_foo=true
tix_foo=false
export port_foo
export tix_foo
function hook_ports_menu {
  if $port_foo; then
    menuentry "foo = true" {
      port_foo=false
      configfile /boot/grub/ports.cfg
    }
  else
    menuentry "foo = false" {
      port_foo=true
      configfile /boot/grub/ports.cfg
    }
  fi
}
function hook_tix_menu {
  if $tix_foo; then
    menuentry "foo = true" {
      tix_foo=false
      configfile /boot/grub/tix.cfg
    }
  else
    menuentry "foo = false" {
      tix_foo=true
      configfile /boot/grub/tix.cfg
    }
  fi
}
function hook_ports_set_all {
  port_foo=true
}
function hook_tix_set_all {
  tix_foo=true
}
function hook_ports_set_basic {
  port_foo=true
}
function hook_tix_set_basic {
  tix_foo=true
}
function hook_ports_set_minimal {
  port_foo=false
}
function hook_tix_set_minimal {
  tix_foo=false
}
function hook_ports_set_no {
  port_foo=false
}
function hook_tix_set_no {
  tix_foo=false
}
function hook_ports_pre {
  if $tix_foo; then
    echo -n "Loading /repository/foo.tix.tar.xz (3.0M) ... "
    module --nounzip /repository/foo.tix.tar.xz \\
           --to /repository/foo.tix.tar.xz
    echo done
  fi
  if $port_foo; then
    echo -n "Loading /repository/foo.tix.tar.xz (3.0M) ... "
    module /repository/foo.tix.tar.xz --tix
    echo done
  fi
}
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Xr tix-iso-bootconfig 8
convenience script makes it easy to generate bootloader configuration for
common scenarios.
.Pp
See
.Xr release-iso-modification 7
for additional examples.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr release-iso-bootconfig 7 ,
.Xr tix-iso-bootconfig 8
