.Dd December 28, 2015
.Dt USER-GUIDE 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm user-guide
.Nd basic system usage and overview
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Sortix is a small self-hosting Unix-like operating system developed since 2011.
This document covers matters relevant to new users from other Unix-like
operating systems.
.Ss Introduction
The installation process is covered in
.Xr installation 7 .
Bootable cdrom releases will offer the options of running a live environment,
installing the operating system, or upgrading an existing installation.
.Pp
You will be presented with a graphical Unix-like command line environment upon
login or booting the live environment.
.Ss Desktop Environment
The
.Xr display 1
desktop environment is automatically started when booting the live environment
or after logging into an installation.
.Pp
A new
.Xr terminal 1
can be launched by pressing Control + Alt + T.
.Pp
The desktop environment can be exited by pressing Control + Alt + Delete,
which will return to the login screen (in installations) or power off the
computer (in the live environment).
.Pp
See
.Xr display 1
for all the available keyboard shortcuts.
.Ss Shutdown
To power off the computer, run
.Xr poweroff 8
or login as
.Sy poweroff .
To reboot the computter, run
.Xr reboot 8
or login as
.Sy reboot .
.Ss Keyboard Layout
The kernel has a default US keyboard layout compiled into it.
.Pp
You can change the current keyboard layout using
.Xr chkblayout 1 .
It loads the requested keyboard layout with the requested name from
.Pa /share/kblayout .
For instance to load a Danish keyboard layout:
.Pp
.Dl $ chkblayout dk
.Pp
The system has basic unicode capabilities but the kernel console font is limited
to characters in codepage 437.
.Ss Graphics
The bootloader prepares an appropriate video mode to the best of its abilities.
If you have a supported graphics card:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
.Xr bga 4 -
Bochs Graphics Adapter found in virtual machines.
.El
.Pp
Then you can run
.Xr chvideomode 1
to change the video mode after boot.
.Pp
.Dl $ chvideomode
.Ss Manual
The system manual can be viewed with the
.Xr man 1
program.
Sortix is currently in the process of being documented and many manual pages are
missing.
The current priority is to document areas specific to Sortix and assume standard
knowledge from other operating systems.
.Ss Third Party Software
Releases come with useful third party software installed.
The
.Pa /tix/tixinfo
directory lists all currently installed ports.
.Pp
The
.Xr tix 8
package management can be used to install more software via the internet:
.Pp
.Dl $ tix install foo
.Pp
You can upgrade to the latest operating system release using:
.Pp
.Dl $ tix upgrade
.Ss Editor
.Xr editor 1
is the standard text file editor.
.Ss Games
The base system comes with games such as
.Xr asteroids 6 .
Additional third party games may be installed through ports.
.Ss Filesystem Hierarchy
The filesystem hierarchy is described in
.Xr hier 7 .
.Ss Memory Usage
The
.Xr memstat 1
command shows the current memory usage.
.Ss Source Code
Releases come full with the system source code in
.Pa /src
as a
.Xr git 1
repository along with the tools to build it and develop it.
The build process is covered in
.Xr development 7 .
.Ss Mounting
You can mount ext2 partitions using
.Xr extfs 8
and unmount them with
.Xr unmount 8 :
.Pp
.Dl $ extfs /dev/ahci0p1 /mnt
.Dl $ unmount /mnt
.Pp
Beware that
.Xr init 8
is unaware of manual mountpoints and powering off will not gracefully unmount.
The
.Xr extfs 8
driver only supports the
.Sy large_file
and
.Sy filetype
ext2 extensions.
You can make a compatible filesystem with:
.Pp
.Dl $ mkfs.ext2 -O none,large_file,filetype
.Pp
You can mount ISO 9660 filesystems for e.g. CD-ROMs using
.Xr iso9660fs 8 .
.Ss Networking
Internet Protocol version 4
.Pq Xr ip 4
networking is available if you have a supported network interface
.Pq Xr if 4 :
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
.Xr em 4 -
Intel 825xx
.El
.Pp
The Internet Protocol version 6
.Xr ( ip6 4 )
is not yet supported.
.Ss Serial Transfer
It is possible to transfer files over serial devices as described in
.Xr serial-transfer 7 .
.Ss Development
The system is self-hosting and is capable of building itself as described in
.Xr development 7 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cross-development 7 ,
.Xr development 7 ,
.Xr installation 7 ,
.Xr serial-transfer 7 ,
.Xr upgrade 7
