.Dd April 23, 2023
.Dt AUTOUPGRADE.CONF 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm autoupgrade.conf
.Nd automatic upgrade configuration
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm /etc/autoupgrade.conf
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
configures
.Xr sysupgrade 8
to do an automatic operating system
.Xr upgrade 7 .
.Pp
The system administrator can automate operating system upgrades by
following
.Xr release-iso-modification 7
to embed the
.Pa /etc/autoupgrade.conf
file into the release cdrom filesystem.
New installations can similarly be automatically installed using
.Xr autoinstall.conf 5 .
.Pp
Each line is formatted as
.Ar question Ns = Ns Ar answer
which provides an
.Ar answer
to a
.Ar question
asked during upgrading.
Alternatively
.Ar question Ns += Ns Ar answer
appends to an existing answer (if any) separated by a space, and
.Ar question Ns ++= Ns Ar answer
appends another line to an existing answer (if any).
Empty lines and lines starting with
.Sq #
are comments and are ignored.
Otherwise whitespace is significant.
The empty answer accepts the default answer (if any) and is different from no
answer, which makes
.Xr sysupgrade 8
ask the question normally.
Upgrades can be made fully non-interactive using
.Sy accept_defaults .
.Pp
Each question has a counterpart question suffixed with
.Sq "!"
which contains a
.Xr sh 1
script that is executed before the question is asked.
If the original question isn't answered, then the script's standard output
is used as the answer to the original question.
The upgrade aborts if the script exits unsuccessfully.
These scripts are useful to customize the upgrades with arbitrary code.
.Pp
The questions in chronological order are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width "12345678"
.It Sy accept_defaults Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" yes Oc ( default Sy no )
Accept the default answer (if any) to questions that were not
configured in
.Nm ?
This feature makes upgrades entirely automated even if unexpected questions
are asked, although the essential questions must be answered.
.It Sy countdown Ns "=" Ns Ar seconds No ( default Li 10 )
Count down for this many
.Ar seconds
with a warning that an automated upgrade is about to happen?
The countdown happens if
.Sy accept_defaults=yes
or if the
.Sy ready
and
.Sy confirm_upgrrade
questions are answered.
.It Sy ignore_missing_programs Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" yes Oc ( default Sy no )
Ignore if the upgrader environment does not have the needed ports installed?
This situation ordinarily does not happen.
.It Sy ready Ns "=" Ns Ar affirmation
Are you ready to begin the upgrade process?
This is a human readable positive affirmation of your choice that you're ready
to upgrade, useful for fully automated upgrades.
Not answering this question is useful for semi-automated upgrades where one
would acknowledge the upgrades before it's begun.
It also provides the opportunity to escape to a shell before upgrading.
.Pp
The
.Sy "ready!"
question is convenient for running shell commands before the upgrade begins.
.It Sy kblayout Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy default "|" Ar layout Oc ( default Sy default )
Switch to this keyboard
.Ar layout
using
.Xr chkblayout 1 ?
.It Sy videomode Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" Sy yes "|" Ar WIDTH Ns x Ns Ar HEIGHT Ns x Ns Ar BPP Oc ( default Sy yes )
Interactively select a graphics resolution using
.Xr chvideomode 1
or non-interactively set it to the specified resolution?
.Pp
If the upgrade is non-interactive with
.Sy accept_defaults=true ,
then the default is instead
.Sy no .
.It Sy consent_fsck Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" Sy yes Oc ( default Sy yes )
Automatically repair inconsistent filesystems with
.Xr fsck 8
when probing for existing installations?
.It Sy run_installer_instead Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" yes Oc ( default Sy yes )
Run the
.Xr sysinstall 8
installer instead if no installations were found?
.Pp
This answer is useful combined with
.Xr autoinstall.conf 5
to either install or upgrade the operating system, regardless of what is already
installed on the machine.
.It Sy which_installaton Ns "=" Ns Ar block-device
The name of the
.Ar block-device
containing the root filesystem to upgrade?
This question is only asked if multiple installations were found.
.It Sy switch_architecture Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" yes Oc ( default Sy no )
Switch the installation to another architecture?
.Pp
Such upgrades are not supported and may corrupt the installation.
.It Sy downgrade_release Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" yes Oc ( default Sy no )
Downgrade the installation to an earlier release?
.Pp
Such upgrades are not supported and may corrupt the installation.
.It Sy skip_release Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" yes Oc ( default Sy no )
Skip upgrading to a release that ordinarily must be upgraded to first?
.Pp
Such upgrades are not supported and may corrupt the installation.
.It Sy downgrade_abi Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" yes Oc ( default Sy no )
Downgrade the installation to an earlier ABI?
.Pp
Such upgrades are not supported and may corrupt the installation.
.It Sy cancel_pending_sysmerge Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" yes Oc ( default Sy yes )
Cancel an existing pending
.Xr sysmerge 8
upgrade?
.It Sy confirm_upgrade Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" Sy yes "|" Sy exit "|" Sy poweroff "|" Sy reboot "|" Sy halt Oc ( default Sy yes )
Upgrade the operating system or abort the upgrade?
This is the final confirmation before the operating system is upgraded.
.Pp
The
.Sy "confirm_upgrade!"
question is convenient for running shell commands before the upgrade step.
The working directory is the root filesystem of the installation with all
filesystems mounted.
Note how
.Xr chroot 8
command may not work as intended at this point since the ABI may have
incompatibly changed.
.It Sy confirm_grub_install Ns "=" Ns Ar confirmation
If the GRUB bootloader is not accepted, then acknowledge that you have seen the
instructions telling you how to manually arrange bootloading by adding the
contents of
.Pa etc/default/grub.d/10_sortix.include
to
.Pa /etc/default/40_custom
of an existing GRUB installation and then running
.Xr update-grub 8 .
.It Sy finally Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy exit "|" Sy poweroff "|" Sy reboot "|" Sy halt "|" Sy boot Oc ( default Sy boot )
What action should be taken when the upgrade is finished?
.Pp
The
.Sy "finally!"
question is convenient for running shell commands once the upgrade is
complete to customize the upgraded installation.
The working directory is the root filesystem of the installation with all
filesystems mounted.
The
.Li "chroot -d ."
command is useful to
.Xr chroot 8
into the root filesystem to run commands with the
.Pa /dev
filesystem mounted.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/etc/autoupgrade.conf" -compact
.It Pa /etc/autoupgrade.conf
Automatic upgrade configuration.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Ss Fully automated upgrade
To perform a fully automated upgrade with, create
.Pa autoupgrade.conf :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
accept_defaults=yes
.Ed
.Pp
Then follow
.Xr release-iso-modification 7
to configure the upgrade medium:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
tix-iso-liveconfig --autoupgrade=autoupgrade.conf liveconfig
tix-iso-bootconfig \\
  --liveconfig=liveconfig --default=1 --random-seed \\
  bootconfig
tix-iso-add sortix.iso bootconfig -o autosortix.iso
.Ed
.Pp
The resulting
.Pa autosortix.iso
image will then automatically upgrade the operating system on whatever machine
it is booted on.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr autoinstall.conf 5 ,
.Xr upgrade.conf 5 ,
.Xr release-iso-modification 7 ,
.Xr upgrade 7 ,
.Xr sysupgrade 8 ,
.Xr tix 8
