.Dd April 23, 2023
.Dt AUTOINSTALL.CONF 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm autoinstall.conf
.Nd automatic installation configuration
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm /etc/autoinstall.conf
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
configures
.Xr sysinstall 8
to do an automatic operating system
.Xr installation 7 .
.Pp
The system administrator can automate operating system installations by
following
.Xr release-iso-modification 7
to embed the
.Pa /etc/autoinstall.conf
file into the release cdrom filesystem.
Existing installations can similarly be automatically upgraded using
.Xr autoupgrade.conf 5 .
.Pp
Each line is formatted as
.Ar question Ns = Ns Ar answer
which provides an
.Ar answer
to a
.Ar question
asked during installation.
Alternatively
.Ar question Ns += Ns Ar answer
appends to an existing answer (if any) separated by a space, and
.Ar question Ns ++= Ns Ar answer
appends another line to an existing answer (if any).
Empty lines and lines starting with
.Sq #
are comments and are ignored.
Otherwise whitespace is significant.
The empty answer accepts the default answer (if any) and is different from no
answer, which makes
.Xr sysinstall 8
ask the question normally.
Installations can be made fully non-interactive using
.Sy accept_defaults .
.Pp
Each question has a counterpart question suffixed with
.Sq "!"
which contains a
.Xr sh 1
script that is executed before the question is asked.
If the original question isn't answered, then the script's standard output
is used as the answer to the original question.
The installation aborts if the script exits unsuccessfully.
These scripts are useful to customize the installation with arbitrary code.
.Pp
The questions in chronological order are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width "12345678"
.It Sy accept_defaults Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" yes Oc ( default Sy no )
Accept the default answer (if any) to questions that were not
configured in
.Nm ?
This feature makes installations entirely automated even if unexpected questions
are asked, although the essential questions must be answered.
.It Sy countdown Ns "=" Ns Ar seconds No ( default Li 10 )
Count down for this many
.Ar seconds
with a warning that an automated installation is about to happen?
The countdown happens if
.Sy accept_defaults=yes
or if the
.Sy ready
question is answered and either the
.Sy disked
or
.Sy confirm_install
questions are answered.
.It Sy ignore_missing_programs Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" yes Oc ( default Sy no )
Ignore if the installer environment does not have the needed ports installed?
This situation ordinarily does not happen.
.It Sy ready Ns "=" Ns Ar affirmation
Are you ready to begin the installation process?
This is a human readable positive affirmation of your choice that you're ready
to install, useful for fully automated installations.
Not answering this question is useful for semi-automated installations where one
would acknowledge the installation before it's begun.
It also provides the opportunity to escape to a shell before installing.
.Pp
The
.Sy "ready!"
question is convenient for running shell commands before the installation
begins.
.It Sy kblayout Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy default "|" Ar layout Oc ( default Sy default )
Switch to this keyboard
.Ar layout
using
.Xr chkblayout 1 ?
The choice is remembered as the
.Xr kblayout 5
system default.
.It Sy videomode Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" Sy yes "|" Ar WIDTH Ns x Ns Ar HEIGHT Ns x Ns Ar BPP Oc ( default Sy yes )
Interactively select a graphics resolution using
.Xr chvideomode 1
or non-interactively set it to the specified resolution?
The choice is remembered as the
.Xr videomode 5
system default.
.Pp
If the installation is non-interactive with
.Sy accept_defaults=true ,
then the default is instead
.Sy no .
.It Sy grub Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" Sy yes Oc
Install the GRUB bootloader onto the device containing the
.Pa /boot
filesystem (if it exists, otherwise the root filesystem)?
.Pp
On BIOS, this is an essential question that must be answered for automatic
installations.
The default is
.Sy yes
if any existing installations are found with GRUB enabled or if no filesystems
were found, otherwise the default is
.Sy no .
.Pp
On EFI, the default is
.Sy yes .
.It Sy grub_distributor Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy BOOT "|" Sy sortix "|" ... Oc ( default Sy BOOT )
On EFI systems, what
.Pa /boot/efi/EFI
subdirectory should the bootloader be installed into?
.Pp
If
.Sy BOOT
is selected, then a removable EFI installation is made and the non-volatile
memory is not modified.
Otherwise this subdirectory scheme lets bootloaders from different operating
systems live side by side.
.Pp
Note: EFI variables are not implemented yet, and this variable currently
defaults to
.Sy BOOT ,
but will change to
.Sy sortix
once EFI variable support is implemented.
.It Sy grub_password Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" Sy yes Oc ( default Sy yes )
Protect the bootloader with a password to avoid unauthorized root access via the
advanced bootloader features?
The standard bootloader menu options don't require a password.
The password is set in the
.Sy grub_password_hash
question.
.Pp
If the installation is non-interactive with
.Sy accept_defaults=true ,
then the default is instead
.Sy no
if the
.Sy grub_password_hash
question is not answered.
.It Sy grub_password_hash Ns "=" Ns Ar hash
The bootloader password as hashed by the
.Xr grub-mkpasswd-pbkdf2 1
program?
The password is asked interactively if this question is not answered.
The choice is remembered in
.Xr grubpw 5 .
.Pp
Although it's discouraged to place unhashed passwords in
.Nm ,
the
.Sy "grub_password!"
question could be answered with
.Li "grub-mkpasswd-pbkdf2 -p password"
to dynamically hash the bootloader password.
.It Sy grub_password_empty Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" Sy yes Oc ( default Sy no )
Allow an insecure empty bootloader password typed interactively?
.It Sy kernel_options Ns "=" Ns Ar options
What
.Xr kernel 7
options should be set in
.Xr grub 5
with
.Sy GRUB_CMDLINE_SORTIX ?
This question is asked only the GRUB port is installed, if the kernel was booted
with explicit options or this question is set.
.It Sy disked Ns "=" Ns Ar commands
Commands to create partitions and filesystems with
.Xr disked 8 ?
The
.Li ++=
syntax is useful to append multiple lines to the
.Sy disked
answer.
A root filesystem must be mounted in order to install the operating system.
The mountpoints are remembered in
.Xr fstab 5 .
.Pp
This is an essential question that must be answered for automatic installations.
.Pp
The
.Sy "disked!"
question is convenient for running shell commands before the partitioning step,
or to generate dynamic partitioning commands on the standard output if the
original
.Sy disked
question is unanswered.
.It Sy missing_bios_boot_partition Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" Sy yes Oc ( default Sy yes )
On BIOS, attempt
.Xr disked 8
again if the GRUB bootloader is installed but the
.Pa /boot
directory's filesystem is inside a GPT partition table that doesn't have a
biosboot partition?
.It Sy missing_esp_partition Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" Sy yes Oc ( default Sy yes )
On EFI, attempt
.Xr disked 8
again if the GRUB bootloader is installed but no EFI System Partition was
mounted on
.Pa /boot/efi ?
.It Sy confirm_install Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" Sy yes "|" Sy exit "|" Sy poweroff "|" Sy reboot "|" Sy halt Oc ( default Sy yes )
Install the operating system or abort the installation?
This is the final confirmation before the operating system is installed, after
the partitioning has taken place.
.Pp
The
.Sy "confirm_install!"
question is convenient for running shell commands before the installation step,
after partitioning has happened, but before the filesystems are mounted.
.It Sy hostname Ns "=" Ns Ar hostname
Hostname for the installation?
The choice is remembered in
.Xr hostname 5 .
.Pp
This is an essential question that must be answered for automatic installations.
If it isn't answered and
.Sy accept_defaults=yes ,
then the current (and likely default) hostname is used.
.It Sy password_hash_root Ns "=" Ns Ar hash
Password for the root user as hashed with
.Xr crypt_newhash 2 ?
The empty string sets the password to the empty string (insecure) and a literal
.Sy x
disables password login for root.
The choice is remembered in
.Xr passwd 5 .
.Pp
This is an essential question that must be answered for automatic installations.
If it isn't answered and
.Sy accept_defaults=yes ,
then password login is disabled for root.
.Pp
Although it's discouraged to place unhashed passwords in
.Nm ,
the
.Sy "password_hash_root!"
question could be answered with
.Li "echo password | passwd -H"
to dynamically hash the root password.
.It Sy password_hash_root Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" Sy yes Oc ( default Sy no )
Allow an insecure empty root password typed interactively?
.It Sy copy_ssh_authorized_keys_root Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" Sy yes Oc ( default Sy yes )
Copy the
.Pa /root/.ssh/authorized_keys
file (if it exists) into the installation?
.It Sy copy_ssh_config_root Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" Sy yes Oc ( default Sy yes )
Copy the
.Pa /root/.ssh/config
file (if it exists) into the installation?
.It Sy copy_ssh_id_rsa_root Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" Sy yes Oc ( default Sy yes )
Copy the
.Pa /root/.ssh/id_rsa
file (if it exists) into the installation?
.It Sy copy_ssh_known_hosts_root Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" Sy yes Oc ( default Sy yes )
Copy the
.Pa /root/.ssh/known_hosts
file (if it exists) into the installation?
.It Sy empty_password Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" Sy yes Oc ( default Sy no )
Allow insecure empty passwords for regular users?
.It Sy enable_gui Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" Sy yes Oc ( default Sy yes )
Enable the
.Xr display 1
graphical user interface?
The choice is remembered in
.Xr session 5 .
.It Sy enable_autoupgrade Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" Sy yes Oc ( default Sy no )
Enable automatically upgrading the operating system with
.Xr tix-autoupgrade 8 ?
The choice is remembered in
.Xr collection.conf 5 .
.It Sy enable_autoupgrade_reboot "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" Sy yes "|" Ar when Oc ( default Sy no )
Automatically reboot to upgrade after scheduling an upgrade in
.Xr tix-autoupgrade 8 ,
and if so, when?
If
.Sy no ,
don't reboot.
If
.Sy yes ,
then reboot one minuter later.
Otherwise, ask
.Xr shutdown 8
to reboot at the time specified by
.Ar when .
The choice is remembered in
.Xr collection.conf 5 .
.It Sy channel Ns "=" Ns Ar channel No ( default is unchanged )
Change the release channel to
.Ar channel .
The choice updates the
.Sy RELEASE_URL
variable in
.Xr collection.conf 5 .
.It Sy enable_ntpd Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" Sy yes Oc ( default Sy no )
Automatically get time from the network using
.Xr ntpd 8 ?
Note this choice has privacy implications as the servers in
.Xr ntpd.conf 5
file will be contacted in the background.
The choice is remembered in
.Pa /etc/init/local
per
.Xr init 5 .
.It Sy enable_sshd Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" Sy yes Oc ( default Sy no )
Enable the
.Xr sshd 8
secure shell server?
The choice is remembered in
.Pa /etc/init/local
per
.Xr init 5 .
.It Sy copy_sshd_config Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" Sy yes Oc ( default Sy no )
Copy the
.Pa /etc/sshd_config
file (if it exists) into the installation?
.It Sy enable_sshd_password Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" Sy yes Oc ( default Sy no )
Enable password authentication in the local
.Xr sshd 8 ?
The choice is remembered in
.Xr sshd_config 5 .
.Pp
It's strongly encouraged to answer
.Sy no
and instead use public key authentication.
The installation environment can be seeded with the ssh keys using the
.Xr release-iso-modification 7
procedure and the default answers will copy the keys into the installation.
.It Sy enable_sshd_root_password Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" Sy yes Oc ( default Sy no )
Enable ssh to the root user with password authentication?
.It Sy copy_sshd_private_keys Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" Sy yes Oc ( default Sy yes )
Copy the sshd private keys (if they exist) into the installation?
These are
.Pa /etc/ssh_host_ecdsa_key ,
.Pa /etc/ssh_host_ed25519_key ,
and
.Pa /etc/ssh_host_rsa_key .
.It Sy confirm_efibootmgr Ns "=" Ns Ar confirmation
On EFI if
.Sy grub_distributor
is not set to
.Sy BOOT ,
then acknowledge that you have seen the instructions telling you to manually
set the EFI boot variables in the firmware or using
.Xr efibootmgr 8
on another operating system?
.It Sy finally Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy exit "|" Sy poweroff "|" Sy reboot "|" Sy halt "|" Sy boot "|" Sy chroot Oc ( default Sy boot )
What action should be taken when the installation is finished?
.Pp
The
.Sy "finally!"
question is convenient for running shell commands once the installation is
complete to customize the installation.
The working directory is the root filesystem of the installation with all
filesystems mounted.
The
.Li "chroot -d ."
command is useful to
.Xr chroot 8
into the new root filesystem to run commands with the
.Pa /dev
filesystem mounted.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/etc/autoinstall.conf" -compact
.It Pa /etc/autoinstall.conf
Automatic installation configuration.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Ss Fully automated installation
To perform a fully automated installation with root login disabled, create
.Pa autoinstall.conf :
.Bd -literal -offset indentq
accept_defaults=yes
grub=yes
disked++=mktable mbr
disked++=mkpart 1 0% 100% ext2 /
hostname=dragon
password_hash_root=x
.Ed
.Pp
Then follow
.Xr release-iso-modification 7
to configure the installation medium:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
tix-iso-liveconfig --autoinstall=autoinstall.conf liveconfig
tix-iso-bootconfig \\
  --liveconfig=liveconfig --default=1 --random-seed \\
  bootconfig
tix-iso-add sortix.iso bootconfig -o autosortix.iso
.Ed
.Pp
The resulting
.Pa autosortix.iso
image will then automatically format the harddisk and install the operating
system on whatever machine it is booted on.
Take care.
.Ss Setting passwords
The
.Xr grub-mkpasswd-pbkdf2 1
command can be used to hash a GRUB password and
.Xr passwd 1
can be used to hash a user password:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
grub-mkpasswd-pbkdf2 -p bootloader-password
echo root-password | passwd -H
.Ed
.Pp
The hashes can then be inserted in
.Nm :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
grub_password_hash=grub.pbkdf2.sha512.10000.68DA[...]
password_hash_root=$2b$10$d/9pP1[...]
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively the passwords could be embedded in
.Nm ,
however beware that your
.Nm
file and the installation medium could leak:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
grub_password_hash!=grub-mkpasswd-pbkdf2 -p bootloader-password
password_hash_root!=echo root-password | passwd -H
.Ed
.Ss Automatically install with sshd
To automatically install the operating system with sshd enabled with keys and
authorizations set up ahead of time, first create
.Pa autoinstall.conf :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
accept_defaults=yes
grub=yes
disked++=mktable mbr
disked++=mkpart 1 0% 100% ext2 /
hostname=example.com
password_hash_root=x
enable_sshd=yes
.Ed
.Pp
Then follow
.Xr release-iso-modification 7
to configure the installation medium with automated installation and sshd:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
tix-iso-liveconfig \\
  --autoinstall=autoinstall.conf \\
  --root-ssh-authorized-keys="$HOME/.ssh/id_rsa.pub" \\
  --sshd-keygen \\
  --sshd-key-known-hosts-file="$HOME/.ssh/known_hosts" \\
  --sshd-key-known-hosts-hosts="example.com example.com,192.0.2.1 192.0.2.1" \\
  liveconfig
tix-iso-bootconfig \\
  --liveconfig=liveconfig --default=1 --random-seed \\
  bootconfig
tix-iso-add sortix.iso bootconfig -o autosortix.iso
.Ed
.Pp
To ssh into the installation after it has finished:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ssh root@example.com
.Ed
.Pp
The connection will be immediately trusted because the just-generated server
keys were associated with the hostname in the
.Pa $HOME/.ssh/known_hosts
file.
This step assumes the hostname (example.com in this example) resolves to the
installation's IP address, otherwise the IP address can be used directly.
If the IP address is known ahead of time, it should be inserted into the
space delimited
.Fl \-sshd-key-known-hosts-hosts
list of host aliases.
.Ss Automatically install into a virtual machine with sshd
To automatically install into a qemu virtual machine, follow the above example
but instead associate the server keys with your localhost and optionally use a
.Pa known_hosts
file per virtual machine.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
  ...
  --sshd-key-known-hosts-file="sortix.hdd.known_hosts" \\
  --sshd-key-known-hosts-hosts=127.0.0.1 \\
  ...
.Ed
.Pp
Create the harddisk and spawn the virtual machine and forward the local port
2222 to the virtual machine's port 22.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
qemu-img create -f qcow2 sortix.hdd 1G
qemu-system-x86_64 \\
  -vga std -m 1024 \\
  -hda sortix.hdd -cdrom autosortix.iso \\
  -device e1000,netdev=net0 \\
  -netdev user,id=net0,hostfwd=tcp:127.0.0.1:2222-:22
.Ed
.Pp
To ssh into the installation after it has finished:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ssh -oUserKnownHostsFile=sortix.hdd.known_hosts -p 2222 root@127.0.0.1
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr autoupgrade.conf 5 ,
.Xr upgrade.conf 5 ,
.Xr release-iso-modification 7 ,
.Xr upgrade 7 ,
.Xr sysupgrade 8 ,
.Xr tix 8
