.Dd June 5, 2017
.Dt ARP 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm arp
.Nd address resolution protocol
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In netinet/if_ether.h
.In netinet/in.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) provides resolution of network layer
addresses to link layer addresses on the local network.
ARP requests asks for the link layer address of a network layer address and ARP
replies contains the link layer address of the requested network layer
address.
Requests are broadcast on the local network, while replies are unicast back to
the sending machine.
.Pp
The
.Xr kernel 7
uses the ARP to resolve Internet Protocol version 4 addresses
.Xr ( inet 4 )
to Ethernet addresses
.Xr ( ether 4 )
in order to transmit Internet Protocol version 4
.Xr ( ip 4 )
datagrams on Ethernet network interfaces
.Xr ( if 4 ) .
.Pp
The
.Xr kernel 7
maintains a cache of ARP replies for every network interface, which is actively
populated whenever there is a need to transmit to a network layer address, and
passively populated with the source addresses of ARP requests from other hosts.
Network layer datagrams are queued whenever a network layer address needs to
be resolved.
Queued datagrams are transmitted when the destination link layer address has
been resolved, or are discarded if the resolution times out.
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
The transmission queue is limited to 16 packets for each network layer address.
.Pp
ARP requests are attempted three times, each attempt timing out after a second.
If each request fails, the cache entry is evicted.
.Pp
When an network address is resolved, its cache entry remains valid for 60
seconds.
Upon expiry, if the cache entry was unused, it is evicted.
Otherwise, its network address is renewed by resolving it again with three
attempts.
In the meanwhile, the entry cache continues to be used for routing.
If the renewal fails, the cache entry is evicted.
.Pp
The ARP cache can contain up to 256 entries.
If the cache is full,
the least recently used cache entry is evicted when a network address is
resolved that is not currently in the cache, and the source addresses from
received ARP messages are not passively added to the cache.
.Pp
The ARP cache uses a hash table with 256 entries, using a linked list in case
of hash collisions.
The hash is the bytewise xor (exclusive or) of every byte in the network
address.
This hash is perfect if the subnet contains no more than 256 addresses, and
degrades in quality for larger subnets, at worst needing to linearly scan the
whole ARP cache.
.Pp
The ARP cache is purged when the network interface's
.Xr ether 4
or
.Xr inet 4
configuration changes.
Packets in the ARP transmission queue are dropped.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ether 4 ,
.Xr if 4 ,
.Xr inet 4 ,
.Xr kernel 7
.Sh STANDARDS
.Rs
.%A D. Plummer
.%D November 1982
.%R STD 37
.%R RFC 826
.%T \&An Ethernet Address Resolution Protocol
.Re
.Sh BUGS
The ARP timeout is not configurable.
.Sh SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
The source network layer and source link layer addresses of received ARP request
and replies are trusted.
If the router does not validate ARP messages on the network are consistent with
the DHCP leases, an attacker will be able to engage in an ARP spoofing attack
that would allow denial of service, man in the middle, and session hijacking
attacks.
.Pp
The cache is limited to 256 entries per interface and if the local subnet is
larger than 256 addresses, then if an attacker is capable of making the local
system concurrently transmit to 256 addresses on the local network not currently
in the ARP cache, then doing so would purge the whole transmission queue.
If the attacker can do this faster than the machines on the local network can
answer ARP requests, transmission service may be denied entirely, or at the
least be significantly degraded as the higher layers wait a little while before
they retransmit.
