.Dd June 6, 2017
.Dt ETHER 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ether
.Nd ethernet
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In netinet/if_ether.h
.Bd -literal
struct ether_addr {
        uint8_t ether_addr_octet[ETHER_ADDR_LEN /* 6 */];
};

struct ether_header {
        uint8_t ether_dhost[ETHER_ADDR_LEN /* 6 */];
        uint8_t ether_shost[ETHER_ADDR_LEN /* 6 */];
        uint16_t ether_type;
};

struct ether_footer {
        uint32_t ether_crc;
};
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The Ethernet is a physical and link layer protocol for datagram exchange on a
local area network.
An Ethernet packet contains an Ethernet frame that contains a datagram of a
higher level protocol.
Ethernet 2.0 framing is implemented.
IEEE Std 802.3 Ethernet framing is intentionally not implemented.
.Pp
Ethernet hosts are addressed with a globally unique six byte address assigned to
the network interface controller.
An Ethernet address can be stored in the
.Vt struct ether_addr
type.
Ethernet addresses are notated in hexadecimal form interspaced with colons,
e.g. 00:00:5e:00:53:ff.
The Ethernet addresses in the range from 00:00:5e:00:53:00 (inclusive) to
00:00:5e:00:53:ff (inclusive) are reserved for documentation.
The address with all bits set
.Pq ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff
is the broadcast address and can be conveniently accessed using the
.Xr etheraddr_broadcast 3
which is initialized to
.Dv ETHERADDR_BROADCAST_INIT .
.Pp
Ethernet packets are transmitted starting with an eight-byte start-of-frame
preamble, followed by the Ethernet frame itself, ending with a twelve-byte
interpacket gap.
Ethernet 2.0 frames consist of a header, a datagram payload, and a frame check
sequence.
Frames are at least 64 bytes and are at most 1518 bytes.
With 18 bytes of Ethernet frame overhead, the minimum transmission unit of the
payload datagram is 46 bytes and the maximum transmission unit is 1500 bytes.
The size of the frame is implicitly determined by the interpacket gap.
The header has the format of
.Vt struct ether_header ,
starting with the destination host address
.Pq Va ether_dhost ,
followed by the source host address
.Pq Va ether_shost ,
ending with a big-endian 16-bit EtherType value denoting the protocol associated
with the payload datagram
.Pq Va ether_type .
The frame check sequence has the format of
.Vt struct ether_footer ,
being a 32-bit cyclic redundancy checksum of the frame except the checksum
itself
.Pq Va ether_crc .
.Pp
Frames are discarded on receipt if the destination address is neither the local
address nor the broadcast address, if the source address is the broadcast
address, or if the checksum is invalid.
.Pp
Network layer addresses can be resolved to Ethernet addresses using the
Address Resolution Protocol
.Xr arp 4 .
.Pp
The
.Va ether_type
field denotes the payload datagram protocol and the following values are
supported:
.Bl -tag -width "12345678"
.It Dv ETHERTYPE_IP Pq Li 0x0800
The Internet Protocol version 4
.Xr ip 4 .
.It Dv ETHERTYPE_ARP Pq Li 0x0806
The Address Resolution Protocol
.Xr arp 4 .
.El
.Pp
The following constants are defined in
.In netinet/if_ether.h :
.Bl -tag -width "12345678"
.It Dv ETHER_ADDR_LEN Li 6
The size of an Ethernet address in bytes.
.It Dv ETHER_TYPE_LEN Li 2
The size of the type field in the Ethernet header in bytes.
.It Dv ETHER_HDR_LEN Li 14
The size of the Ethernet header in bytes.
.It Dv ETHER_CRC_LEN Li 4
The size of the Ethernet frame check sequence in bytes.
.It Dv ETHER_LEN Li 18
The total size of the Ethernet header and the frame check sequence in bytes.
.It Dv ETHER_MIN_LEN Li 64
The minimum size of Ethernet frames.
.It Dv ETHER_MAX_LEN Li 1518
The maximum size of Ethernet frames.
.It Dv ETHERMTU Li 1500
The maximum transmission unit for Ethernet payloads.
.It Dv ETHERMIN Li 46
The minimum transmission unit for Ethernet payloads.
.It Dv ETHERADDR_BROADCAST_INIT Li {{0xff, 0xff, 0xff, 0xff, 0xff, 0xff}}
An initializer list for
.Vt struct ether_addr
that initializes it to the broadcast address ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff.
.El
.Sh ERRORS
Socket operations can fail these error conditions, in addition to the error
conditions of the invoked function.
.Bl -tag -width [EADDRNOTAVAIL]
.It Bq Er EMSGSIZE
The datagram was too large to be sent because it exceeded the maximum
transmission unit (MTU) (1500 bytes) of the Ethernet protocol.
.It Bq Er ENOBUFS
There was not enough memory available for network packets.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr etheraddr_broadcast 3 ,
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr if 4 ,
.Xr inet 4 ,
.Xr ip 4 ,
.Xr kernel 7
.Sh STANDARDS
.Rs
.%A Digital Equipment Corporation
.%A Intel Corporation
.%A Xerox Corporation
.%D November 1982
.%R Version 2.0
.%T The Ethernet - A Local Area Network
.Re
.Pp
.Rs
.%A C. Hornig
.%D April 1984
.%R STD 41
.%R RFC 894
.%T A Standard for the Transmission of IP Datagrams over Ethernet Networks
.%Q Symbolics Cambridge Research Center
.Re
.Pp
.Rs
.%A Internet Engineering Task Force
.%A R. Braden (ed.)
.%D October 1989
.%R STD 3
.%R RFC 1122
.%T Requirements for Internet Hosts -- Communication Layers
.%Q USC/Information Sciences Institute
.Re
.Rs
.%A Internet Engineering Task Force
.%A D. Eastlake 3rd
.%A J. Abley
.%D October 2013
.%R RFC 7042
.%T IANA Considerations and IETF Protocol and Documentation Usage for IEEE 802 Parameters
.%Q Huawei
.%Q Dyn, Inc.
.Re
