.Dd June 11, 2017
.Dt IF 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm if
.Nd network interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/ioctl.h
.In net/if.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Network interfaces are devices that provide transmission and receipt of network
packets.
The name of a network interface is the name of the device driver followed by the
driver instance number, and each network interface have an unique index number
distinct from the driver instance number.
The name length is restricted to
.Dv IF_NAMESIZE
bytes including the trailing nul byte.
Network interfaces are exposed in the filesystem as
.Pa /dev/ Ns Ar name Ns Ar X
devices, where
.Ar name
is the driver name, and the
.Ar X
number denotes which device using that driver.
Each driver is documented with a manual page with the driver's name in section
4 of the manual.
.Sh LINK LAYER
Network interfaces abstracts a hardware device or a software device as a link
layer protocol:
.Bl -tag -width "12345678"
.It Ethernet Controller Pq Dv IF_TYPE_ETHERNET
Packets are received and transmitted with the Ethernet
.Xr ether 4
link layer protocol.
The
.Va type
field of
.Vt struct if_info
is set to
.Dv IF_TYPE_ETHERNET
and the
.Va addr
field contains the 6-byte Ethernet address assigned to the Ethernet controller.
.It Loopback Device Pq Dv IF_TYPE_LOOPBACK
The software loopback device
.Xr lo 4
on the local host receives any packets transmitted on it.
The
.Va type
field of
.Vt struct if_info
is set to
.Dv IF_TYPE_LOOPBACK
and the
.Va addr
field is unused.
.El
.Sh NETWORK LAYER
Network layer protocols are layered on top of the link layer:
.Bl -tag -width "12345678"
.It Internet Protocol version 4 Pq Dv AF_INET
The Internet Protocol version 4
.Xr ip 4
provides the network layer of the Internet Protocol version 4 protocol family
.Xr inet 4 ,
containing transport protocols such as the Transmission Control Protocol
.Xr tcp 4 ,
and the User Datagram Protocol
.Xr udp 4 .
When combined with the Ethernet link layer, the Address Resolution Protocol
.Xr arp 4
is used to resolve network layer addresses into link layer addresses.
.El
.Sh CONFIGURATION
The static information about a network interface is stored in
.Vt struct if_info :
.Bd -literal
struct if_info {
        unsigned int linkid;
        int type;
        int features;
        size_t addrlen;
        char name[IF_NAMESIZE];
        unsigned char addr[IF_HWADDR_MAXSIZE];
};
.Ed
.Pp
.Va linkid
is the network interface's index number.
.Va type
is the link layer protocol.
.Va features
is a bit mask of the features provided by the network interface:
.Bl -tag -width "12345678"
.It IF_FEATURE_ETHERNET_CRC_OFFLOAD
The Ethernet CRC32 checksum is computed in hardware.
.El
.Pp
.Va addrlen
is the size of the interface's assigned hardware address stored in the
.Va addr
field.
.Va name
is the nul-terminated string name of the network interface.
.Pp
The status information about a network interface is stored in
.Vt struct if_status :
.Bd -literal
struct if_status {
        int flags;
        size_t mtu;
};
.Ed
.Pp
.Va flags
is a bit mask of network interface status conditions:
.Bl -tag -width "12345678"
.It IF_STATUS_FLAGS_UP
The network interface link is up and packets can be received and transmitted.
.El
.Pp
.Va mtu
is the maximum transmission unit of the network layer datagram that can be
sent or transmitted on the link layer.
.Pp
The configuration of the network interface is stored in
.Vt if_config :
.Bd -literal
struct if_config_ether {
       struct ether_addr address;
};

struct if_config_inet {
       struct in_addr address;
       struct in_addr router;
       struct in_addr subnet;
};

struct if_config {
       struct if_config_ether ether;
       struct if_config_inet inet;
};
.Ed
.Pp
.Va ether
is the configuration of the
.Xr ether 4
link layer protocol where
.Va address
is the Ethernet address that received packets must have as the destination
address and the address used as the source address in transmitted packets.
.Va address
defaults on network interface creation to the value of the
.Va addr
field of the the network interface's
.Va struct if_info .
.Pp
.Va inet
is the configuration of the
.Xr ip 4
network layer protocol where
.Va address
is the local address,
.Va router
is the default route, and
.Va subnet
is the subnet mask.
The protocol is disabled if
.Va address
is set to the any address
.Pq 0.0.0.0 .
.Pp
Configuration changes to the local addresses or routing information will cause
the remote side of existing sockets to become unreachable where paths are no
longer configured.
Currently outgoing packets are unaffected by configuration changes when they
have left the appropriate network layers.
Outgoing packets may be queued for a short period in queues such as
the data link layer address resolution queue or in the transmission queue.
.Sh IOCTLS
Network interfaces provide the following
.Xr ioctl 2
requests defined in
.In sys/ioctl.h :
.Bl -tag -width "12345678"
.It Dv IOCGETTYPE Fa "void"
Return the device
.Fa type
that as a parameter to the
.Dv IOC_TYPE(int type)
macro returns
.Dv IOC_TYPE_NETWORK_INTERFACE
if the device is a network interface.
.It Dv NIOC_GETCONFIG Fa "struct if_config *"
Retrieve the network interface configuration for all protocols atomically.
.It Dv NIOC_GETCONFIG_ETHER Fa "struct if_config_ether *"
Retrieve the Ethernet configuration.
.It Dv NIOC_GETCONFIG_INET Fa "struct if_config_inet *"
Retrieve Internet Protocol version 4 configuration.
.It Dv NIOC_GETINFO Fa "struct if_info *"
Retrieve the network interface static information.
.It Dv NIOC_GETSTATUS Fa "struct if_status *"
Retrieve the network interface status.
.It Dv NIOC_SETCONFIG Fa "const struct if_config *"
Set the network interface configuration for all protocols atomically.
.It Dv NIOC_SETCONFIG_ETHER Fa "const struct if_config_ether *"
Set the Ethernet configuration.
.It Dv NIOC_SETCONFIG_INET Fa "const struct if_config_inet *"
Set the Internet Protocol version 4 configuration.
.It Dv NIOC_WAITLINKSTATUS Fa "int"
If the parameter is 0, wait indefinitely until the network interface link is
down, otherwise wait until the link is up.
If the link is already in the specified condition, return immediately.
.El
.Sh SOCKET OPTIONS
Sockets are made with
.Xr socket 2
by requesting the desired network layer protocol and the desired transport layer
protocol.
These
.Xr setsockopt 2 /
.Xr getsockopt 2
options of level
.Dv SOL_SOCKET
control aspects related to the network interface and are defined in
.In sys/socket.h :
.Bl -tag -width "12345678"
.It Dv SO_BINDTODEVICE Fa "char[]"
Set the network interface the socket is bound to by looking up the string value
(which need not be nul-terminated) as an network interface name, and then
binding the socket to that network interface index number; or failing with
.Er ENODEV
if no such device exists.
Gets the name of the network interface the socket is bound to, by looking up the
network interface index number the socket is bound to, and copying out the name
of that network interface; or copying out the empty string if so no such device
exists.
If bound to a network interface, a socket will only receive from and transmit on
that network interface.
(Initially the empty string)
.It Dv SO_BINDTOINDEX Fa "unsigned int"
Sets the network interface the socket is bound to by the network interface index
number, not verifying such an network interface exists, returning with the error
.Er EINVAL
if the requested index number exceeds
.Dv UINT_MAX .
Gets the index number of the network interface the socket is bound to.
Index 0 means no network interface.
If bound to a network interface, a socket will only receive from and transmit on
that network interface.
(Initially 0)
.It Dv SO_BROADCAST Fa "int"
Sending to a broadcast address is allowed when set to 1, sending to a broadcast
address will fail with
.Ev EACCESS
when set to 0.
This option is boolean, setting it to non-zero is the same as setting it to 1.
This option only pertains to datagram sockets.
(Initially 0)
.It Dv SO_DEBUG Fa "int"
Whether the socket is in debug mode.
This option is not implemented.
This option is boolean, setting it to non-zero is the same as setting it to 1.
Attempting to set it to non-zero will fail with
.Ev EPERM .
(Initially 0)
.It Dv SO_DOMAIN Fa "sa_family_t"
The socket domain (the address family).
This option can only be read.
The initial value is set when making the socket.
.It Dv SO_DONTROUTE Fa "int"
Whether to bypass the routing table and only send on the local network.
This option is not implemented.
This option is boolean, setting it to non-zero is the same as setting it to 1.
Attempting to set it to non-zero will fail with
.Ev EPERM .
(Initially 0)
.It Dv SO_ERROR Fa "int"
The asynchronous pending error
(an
.Xr errno 3
value).
Cleared to 0 when read.
This option can only be read.
(Initially 0)
.It Dv SO_PROTOCOL Fa "int"
The socket protocol.
This option can only be read.
The initial value is set when making the socket.
.It Dv SO_RCVBUF Fa "int"
How many bytes the receive queue can use.
Setting this option to a value beyond the socket's hard limit will instead set
this option to the hard limit.
The initial value depends on the socket protocol.
.It Dv SO_REUSEADDR Fa "int"
Don't fail to
.Xr bind 2
the second socket with
.Ev EADDRINUSE
when one socket is bound to the any address and a port and the other socket is
bound to another address and that port, whenever this option is set to 1.
This option is boolean, setting it to non-zero is the same as setting it to 1.
(Initially 0)
.It Dv SO_SNDBUF Fa "int"
How many bytes the send queue can use.
Setting this option to a value beyond the socket's hard limit will instead set
this option to the hard limit.
The initial value depends on the socket protocol.
.It Dv SO_TYPE Fa "int"
The socket type.
This option can only be read.
The initial value is set when making the socket.
.El
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
Network packets waiting to be transmitted or received have 384 dedicated pages
of backing memory (allocated on first use).
If more packets are needed, available system memory is used up to a limit of
1/16 of the total system memory.
If no memory is available for another network packet or the limit is hit,
received packets may be dropped and transmitted packets may be dropped or
temporarily fail with
.Er ENOBUFS .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr getsockopt 2 ,
.Xr ioctl 2 ,
.Xr setsockopt 2 ,
.Xr if_nameindex 3 ,
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr ether 4 ,
.Xr inet 4 ,
.Xr ip 4 ,
.Xr lo 4 ,
.Xr kernel 7 ,
.Xr dhclient 8 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh STANDARDS
.St -p1003.1-2008
only specifies a minimal
.In net/if.h
with
.Dv IF_NAMESIZE ,
.Vt struct if_nameindex
and the
.Xr if_nameindex 3
family of functions.
.Pp
.St -p1003.1-2008
specifies the socket options
.Dv SO_ACCEPTCONN ,
.Dv SO_BROADCAST ,
.Dv SO_DEBUG ,
.Dv SO_DONTROUTE ,
.Dv SO_ERROR ,
.Dv SO_KEEPALIVE ,
.Dv SO_LINGER ,
.Dv SO_OOBINLINE ,
.Dv SO_RCVBUF ,
.Dv SO_RCVLOWAT ,
.Dv SO_RCVTIMEO ,
.Dv SO_REUSEADDR ,
.Dv SO_SNDBUF ,
.Dv SO_SNDLOWAT ,
.Dv SO_SNDTIMEO ,
and
.Dv SO_TYPE
in
.In sys/socket.h
.Sh HISTORY
Network interfaces as described here originally appeared in Sortix 1.1, except
when noted otherwise.
.Pp
The
.Dv SO_BINDTODEVICE
socket option is also found on Linux.
