.Dd June 4, 2017
.Dt PING 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ping
.Nd ping protocol
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/socket.h
.In netinet/in.h
.In netinet/ping.h
.Ft int
.Fn socket AF_INET SOCK_DGRAM IPPROTO_PING
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The Ping Protocol uses the Echo Request and Echo Reply messages of the Internet
Control Message Protocol (ICMP) to provide a connectionless best-effort echo of
datagrams.
A cooperating host will send back a Echo Reply message containing the same data
as any Echo Request messages it receives.
It is designed for packet-switched networks and provides multiplexing with a
16-bit port number (using the identifier field of the Echo Request and Echo
Reply messages), and basic data integrity checks (16-bit ones' complement sum),
and broadcasting.
It does not provide a guarantee of delivery, avoidance of delivering multiple
times, ordering, out of band data, nor flow control.
.Pp
Ping sockets allow only sending Echo Request messages and receiving Echo Reply
messages.
The kernel will automatically send Echo Reply messages in response to any
received Echo Request Messages.
.Pp
The structure of ping datagrams is a 4 bytes sequence number (in big endian)
followed by 0 or more bytes of an optional payload.
Ping datagrams are sent inside a Echo Request message (with that sequence
number) and received inside a Echo Reply message (also containing a sequence
number).
.Pp
Ping sockets are made with
.Xr socket 2
by passing an appropriate
.Fa domain
.Dv ( AF_INET ) ,
.Dv SOCK_DGRAM
as the
.Fa type ,
and
.Dv IPPROTO_PING
as the
.Fa protocol .
Initially a socket is not bound, it won't receive datagrams, and it does not
have a remote address and port set.
.Pp
A Ping socket has the following state:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
The address family it belongs to.
.It
The network interface it is bound to (if any)
.Dv ( SO_BINDTODEVICE
and
.Dv SO_BINDTOINDEX )
(initially none).
.It
The local address and port (when bound) (initially none).
.It
The remote address and port (when connected) (initially none).
.It
A receive queue (initially empty).
.It
Whether the socket has been
.Xr shutdown 2
for read and/or write (initially neither).
.It
A single pending asynchronous error (if any)
.Dv ( SO_ERROR )
(initially none).
.It
Whether broadcast datagrams can be sent
.Dv ( SO_BROADCAST )
(initially no).
.It
Whether binding to the any address and a port doesn't conflict with binding to
another address on the same port
.Dv ( SO_REUSEADDR )
(initially no).
.It
Limits on the size of the receive and send queues
.Dv ( SO_RCVBUF
and
.Dv SO_SNDBUF ) .
.El
.Pp
Datagrams are sent as a packet with a header and the datagram itself.
The header contains the port and the checksum.
The header is 8 bytes.
.Pp
Port numbers are 16-bit and range from 1 to 65535.
Port 0 is not valid.
Binding to port 0 will assign an available port on the requested address.
Sending or connecting to port 0 will fail with
.Er EADDRNOTAVAIL .
Received Echo Reply packets whose port number is port 0 will be silently
dropped.
Ping ports are distinct from ports in other transport layer protocols.
.Pp
Packets contain a 16-bit ones' complement checksum.
A received packet will be silently discarded if its checksum does not match its
contents.
.Pp
Sockets can be bound to a local address and port with
.Xr bind 2
(if not already bound),
or an local address and port will be automatically assigned on the first send
or connect operation.
The local address and port can be read with
.Xr getsockname 2 .
If the socket hasn't been bound, the local address and port is reported as the
any address on port 0.
There are no ports that require superuser privileges.
.Pp
Sockets can be bound to the any address, the broadcast address, the address of
a network interface, or the broadcast address of a network interface.
Binding to port 0 will automatically assign an available port on the requested
local address or fail with
.Er EAGAIN
if no port is available.
No two sockets can bind to the same local address and port.
No two sockets can be bound such that one is bound to the any address and a
port, and the other socket is bound to another address and the same port; unless
both sockets had the
.Dv SO_REUSEADDR
socket option set when the second socket was bound, and the current user is the
same that bound the first socket or the current user has superuser privileges.
.Pp
A socket bound to a local address and port will receive an incoming datagram of
the following conditions hold:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
The datagram belongs to the socket's address family and the protocol is Ping.
.It
The datagram's checksum matches the datagram.
.It
The datagram is an Echo Reply message.
.It
The datagram's port number is not port 0.
.It
The datagram is sent to the address or broadcast address of the network
interface it is received on, or the datagram was sent to the broadcast address;
.It
The socket is either bound to the receiving network interface, or the socket is
not bound to a network interface;
.It
The datagram is sent to the socket's local port;
.It
The datagram is sent to the socket's local address, or the socket's local
address is the any address (and no other socket is bound to the datagram's
address and that port);
.It
The socket is connected and the datagram was sent from the remote address and
the remote port, or the socket is not connected; and
.It
The socket is not shut down for reading.
.El
.Pp
If so, the datagram is added to the socket's receive queue, otherwise it is
discarded.
The receive queue contains incoming packets waiting to be received.
Incoming packets are dropped if the receive queue is full.
Shrinking the receive queue limit drops packets as needed to stay below the
limit.
.Pp
The remote address and port can be set multiple times with
.Xr connect 2 ,
after which the socket is said to be connected, but Ping is connectionless and
no handshake is sent.
The remote port must not be port 0 or the connection will fail with
.Er EADDRNOTAVAIL .
If the socket is not bound,
.Xr connect 2
will determine which network interface will be used to send to the remote
address, and then bind to the address of that network interface together with an
available port.
.Xr connect 2
will fail if there is no route from the local address to the requested remote
address.
A connected socket only receive datagrams from the remote address and port.
.Xr connect 2
will drop datagrams in the receive queue that don't originate from the
requested remote address.
The
.Xr send 2 ,
.Xr write 2 ,
and
.Xr writev 2
functions can be used on a connected socket and they send to the remote address
and port by default.
If the socket is connected, the destination given to
.Xr sendto 2
and
.Xr sendmsg 2
must be
.Dv NULL .
The remote address and port can be read with
.Xr getpeername 2 .
.Pp
The socket can be disconnected by connecting to a socket address with the family
value set to
.Dv AF_UNSPEC ,
which resets the remote address and port (if set), and otherwise has no effect.
.Pp
Datagrams can be sent with
.Xr sendmsg 2
and
.Xr sendto 2 .
Sending on a socket not bound to a local address and port will bind to the
any address and an available port, or fail with
.Er EAGAIN
if no port is available.
Datagrams can be received with
.Xr recvmsg 2 ,
.Xr recvfrom 2 ,
.Xr recv 2 ,
.Xr read 2 ,
and
.Xr readv 2 .
If an asynchronous error is pending, the next send and receive operation will
fail with that error and clear the asynchronous error, so the next operation can
succeed.
Asynchronous errors can arise from network problems.
There is no send queue at the Ping level and datagrams are directly forwarded to
the network layer.
It is an error to use any of the flags
.Dv MSG_CMSG_CLOEXEC ,
.Dv MSG_CMSG_CLOFORK ,
.Dv MSG_EOR ,
.Dv MSG_OOB ,
and
.Dv MSG_WAITALL .
.Pp
The condition of the socket can be tested with
.Xr poll 2
where
.Dv POLLIN
signifies a packet has been received (or the socket is shut down for reading),
.Dv POLLOUT
signifies a packet can be sent now (and the socket is not shut down for
writing),
.Dv POLLHUP
signifies the socket is shut down for writing, and
.Dv POLLERR
signifies an asynchronous error is pending.
.Pp
The socket can be shut down for receiving and/or sending with
.Xr shutdown 2 .
The receive queue is emptied when shut down for receive (asynchronous errors are
preserved) and receive operations will succeed with an end of file
condition, but any pending asynchronous errors will take precedence and be
delivered instead.
Sending when shut down for writing will raise
.Dv SIGPIPE
and fail with
.Er EPIPE
(regardless of a pending asynchronous error).
.Pp
Socket options can be set with
.Xr setsockopt 2
and read with
.Xr getsockopt 2
and exist on the
.Dv IPPROTO_PING
level as well as applicable underlying protocol levels.
.Pp
Broadcast Echo Requests can be sent by setting the
.Dv SO_BROADCAST
socket option with
.Xr setsockopt 2
and sending to a broadcast address of the network layer.
RFC 1122 3.2.2.6 allows hosts to ignore broadcast Echo Requests.
.Sh SOCKET OPTIONS
Ping sockets support these
.Xr setsockopt 2 /
.Xr getsockopt 2
options at level
.Dv SOL_SOCKET :
.Bl -tag -width "12345678"
.It Dv SO_BINDTODEVICE Fa "char[]"
Bind to a network interface by its name.
(Described in
.Xr if 4 )
.It Dv SO_BINDTOINDEX Fa "unsigned int"
Bind to a network interface by its index number.
(Described in
.Xr if 4 )
.It Dv SO_BROADCAST Fa "int"
Whether sending to a broadcast address is allowed.
(Described in
.Xr if 4 )
.It Dv SO_DEBUG Fa "int"
Whether the socket is in debug mode.
This option is not implemented and is initially 0.
Attempting to set it to non-zero will fail with
.Er EPERM .
(Described in
.Xr if 4 )
.It Dv SO_DOMAIN Fa "sa_family_t"
The socket
.Fa domain
(the address family).
This option can only be read.
(Described in
.Xr if 4 )
.It Dv SO_DONTROUTE Fa "int"
Whether to bypass the routing table and only send on the local network.
This option is not implemented and is initially 0.
Attempting to set it to non-zero will fail with
.Er EPERM .
(Described in
.Xr if 4 )
.It Dv SO_ERROR Fa "int"
The asynchronous pending error
(an
.Xr errno 3
value).
Cleared to 0 when read.
This option can only be read.
(Described in
.Xr if 4 )
.It Dv SO_PROTOCOL Fa "int"
The socket protocol
.Dv ( IPPROTO_PING ) .
This option can only be read.
(Described in
.Xr if 4 )
.It Dv SO_RCVBUF Fa "int"
How many bytes the receive queue can use (default is 64 pages, max 4096 pages).
(Described in
.Xr if 4 )
.It Dv SO_REUSEADDR Fa "int"
Whether binding to the any address on a port doesn't conflict with binding to
another address and the same port, if both sockets have this option set and the
user binding the second socket is the same that bound the first socket or the
user binding the second socket has superuser privileges.
(Described in
.Xr if 4 )
.It Dv SO_SNDBUF Fa "int"
How many bytes the send queue can use (default is 64 pages, max 4096 pages).
(Described in
.Xr if 4 )
.It Dv SO_TYPE Fa "int"
The socket type
.Dv ( SOCK_DGRAM ) .
This option can only be read.
(Described in
.Xr if 4 )
.El
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
Received broadcast echo requests are ignored as permitted by RFC 1122 3.2.2.6.
.Pp
Each packet currently use a page of memory, which counts towards the receive
queue limit.
.Pp
If no specific port is requested, one is randomly selected in the dynamic port
range 32768 (inclusive) through 61000 (exclusive).
.Sh EXAMPLES
This example sends a Echo Request and blocks indefinitely until it receives a
Echo Reply.
.Va remote
is the remote socket address and
.Va remote_len
is the size of
.Va remote.
The
.Va remote
and
.Va remote_len
values should all be chosen according to the address family and network layer.
.Bd -literal
sa_family_t af = /* ... */;
const struct sockaddr *remote = /* ... */;
socklen_t remote_len = /* ... */;

int fd = socket(af, SOCK_DGRAM, IPPROTO_PING);
if (fd < 0)
        err(1, "socket");
if (connect(fd, remote, remote_len) < 0)
        err(1, "connect");
unsigned char request[56];
arc4random_buf(request, sizeof(request));
if (send(fd, request, sizeof(request), 0) < 0)
        err(1, "send");
unsigned char reply[56 + 1 /* detect too large reply */];
ssize_t amount = recv(fd, reply, sizeof(reply), 0);
if (amount < 0 )
        err(1, "recv");
if (amount == sizeof(request) && !memcmp(request, reply, sizeof(request)))
        printf("correct echo reply\\n");
else
        printf("incorrect echo reply\\n");
.Ed
.Sh ERRORS
Socket operations can fail due to these error conditions, in addition to the
error conditions of the network and link layer, and the error conditions of the
invoked function.
.Bl -tag -width [EADDRNOTAVAIL]
.It Bq Er EACCES
A datagram was sent to a broadcast address, but
.Dv SO_BROADCAST
is turned off.
.It Bq Er EADDRINUSE
The socket cannot be bound to the requested address and port because another
socket was already bound to 1) the same address and port 2) the any address
and the same port (and
.Dv SO_REUSEADDR
was not set on both sockets), or 3) some address and the same port but the
requested address was the any address (and
.Dv SO_REUSEADDR
was not set on both sockets).
.It Bq Er EADDRNOTAVAIL
The socket cannot be bound to the requested address because no network interface
had that address or broadcast address.
.It Bq Er EAGAIN
A port could not be assigned because each port in the dynamic port range had
already been bound to a socket in a conflicting manner.
.It Bq Er ECONNREFUSED
The destination host of a datagram was not listening on the port.
This error can happen asynchronously.
.It Bq Er EHOSTDOWN
The destination host of a datagram is not up.
This error can happen asynchronously.
.It Bq Er EHOSTUNREACH
The destination host of a datagram was unreachable.
This error can happen asynchronously.
.It Bq Er EISCONN
A destination address and port was specified when sending a datagram, but the
socket has already been connected to a remote address and port.
.It Bq Er EMSGSIZE
The datagram was too large to be sent because it exceeded the maximum
transmission unit (MTU) on the path between the local and remote address.
This error can happen asynchronously.
.It Bq Er ENETDOWN
The network interface used to deliver a datagram isn't up.
This error can happen asynchronously.
.It Bq Er ENETUNREACH
The destination network of a datagram was unreachable.
This error can happen asynchronously.
.It Bq Er ENETUNREACH
The remote address could not be connected because there was no route from the
local address to the remote address.
.It Bq Er ENOBUFS
There was not enough memory available for network packets.
.It Bq Er EPERM
One of the unimplemented
.Dv SO_DEBUG
and
.Dv SO_DONTROUTE
socket options was attempted to be set to a non-zero value.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr bind 2 ,
.Xr connect 2 ,
.Xr getpeername 2 ,
.Xr getsockname 2 ,
.Xr getsockopt 2 ,
.Xr poll 2 ,
.Xr recvfrom 2 ,
.Xr recvmsg 2 ,
.Xr sendmsg 2 ,
.Xr sendto 2 ,
.Xr setsockopt 2 ,
.Xr shutdown 2 ,
.Xr socket 2 ,
.Xr icmp 4 ,
.Xr if 4 ,
.Xr inet 4 ,
.Xr ip 4 ,
.Xr kernel 7 ,
.Xr ping 8
.Sh STANDARDS
.Rs
.%A J. Postel (ed.)
.%D September 1981
.%R STD 5
.%R RFC 792
.%T Internet Control Message Protocol - DARPA Internet Program Protocol Specification
.%Q USC/Information Sciences Institute
.Re
.Pp
.Rs
.%A Internet Engineering Task Force
.%A R. Braden (ed.)
.%D October 1989
.%R STD 3
.%R RFC 1122
.%T Requirements for Internet Hosts -- Communication Layers
.%Q USC/Information Sciences Institute
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
Ping sockets originally appeared in Sortix 1.1.
.Sh BUGS
The handling of
.Dv SO_REUSEADDR in
.Xr bind 2
does not yet enforce the two sockets to be bound by the same user or the second
socket to be bound by a user with superuser privileges.
The requirement that both sockets have
.Dv SO_REUSEADDR
set might be relaxed to only the second socket having it set when this
permission check is implemented.
.Pp
The integration with the network layer is inadequate and the asynchronous errors
.Er ECONNREFUSED ,
.Er EHOSTDOWN ,
.Er EHOSTUNREACH ,
and
.Er ENETUNREACH
are never delivered asynchronously from the network.
.Pp
Ping sockets does not yet provide access to IP header values such as the Time
To Live and does not yet report ICMP error messages.
.Pp
The
.Xr send 2
flag
.Dv MSG_DONTROUTE
and the
.Dv SO_DONTROUTE
socket option are not implemented yet.
.Pp
The
.Dv SO_SNDBUF
socket option is currently not used and the send queue is not limited at the
socket level.
.Pp
The automatic assignment of ports is random, but is statistically biased.
A random port is picked, and if it is taken, the search sequentially iterates
ports in ascending order until an available port is found or the search
terminates.