.Dd June 3, 2017
.Dt TCP 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tcp
.Nd transmission control protocol
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/socket.h
.In netinet/in.h
.In netinet/tcp.h
.Ft int
.Fn socket AF_INET SOCK_STREAM IPPROTO_TCP
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) is a connection-oriented transport layer
for the Internet Protocol
.Xr ip 4
that provides a reliable byte stream connection between two hosts.
It is designed for packet-switched networks and provides sequenced data,
retransmissions on packet loss, handling of duplicated packets, flow control,
basic data integrity checks, multiplexing with a 16-bit port number, support for
out-of-band urgent data, and detection of lost connection.
TCP provides the
.Dv SOCK_STREAM
abstraction for the
.Xr inet 4
protocol family.
.Pp
TCP sockets are made with
.Xr socket 2
by passing an appropriate
.Fa domain
.Dv ( AF_INET ) ,
.Dv SOCK_STREAM
as the
.Fa type ,
and 0 or
.Dv IPPROTO_TCP
as the
.Fa protocol .
Newly created TCP sockets are not bound to a local address nor connected to a
remote socket.
.Pp
Port numbers are 16-bit and range from 1 to 65535.
Port 0 is not valid.
Binding to port 0 will assign an available port on the requested address.
Connecting to port 0 will fail with
.Er EADDRNOTAVAIL .
Received packets whose source or destination address is port 0 will be silently
dropped.
TCP ports are distinct from ports in other transport layer protocols.
.Pp
Packets contain a 16-bit ones' complement checksum.
Received packets will be silently discarded if their checksum does not match
the contents.
.Pp
Sockets can be bound to a local address and port with
.Xr bind 2
(if not already bound),
or an local address and port will be automatically assigned when connected.
The local address and port can be read with
.Xr getsockname 2 .
If the socket hasn't been bound, the local address and port is reported as the
any address on port 0.
Binding to a well-known port (port 1 through port 1023) requires superuser
privileges.
.Pp
Sockets can be bound to the any address, the broadcast address, the address of
a network interface, or the broadcast address of a network interface.
Binding to port 0 will automatically assign an available port on the requested
local address or fail with
.Er EAGAIN
if no port is available.
No two sockets can bind to the same local address and port.
No two sockets can be bound such that one is bound to the any address and a
port, and the other socket is bound to another address and the same port; unless
both sockets had the
.Dv SO_REUSEADDR
socket option set when the second socket was bound, and the current user is the
same that bound the first socket or the current user has superuser privileges.
.Pp
A connection to a remote TCP socket can be established with
.Xr connect 2 .
Connections can be established when both sides calls
.Xr connect 2
on each other.
If the socket is not bound,
.Xr connect 2
will determine which network interface will be used to send to the remote
address, and then bind to the address of that network interface together with an
available port.
.Xr connect 2
will fail if there is no route from the local address to the requested remote
address.
.Pp
Incoming connections can be received by binding to a local address with
.Xr bind 2
and listening for connections with
.Xr listen 2 ,
after which incoming connections can be retrieved with
.Xr accept 2 .
.Pp
Bytes can be received from the remote TCP socket with
.Xr recv 2 ,
.Xr recvmsg 2 ,
.Xr recvfrom 2 ,
.Xr read 2 ,
or
.Xr readv 2 .
Bytes can be transmitted to the remote TCP socket with
.Xr send 2 ,
.Xr sendmsg 2 ,
.Xr sendto 2 ,
.Xr write 2 ,
or
.Xr writev 2 .
Transmitting when the connection has broken will result in the process being
sent the
.Dv SIGPIPE
signal and fail with
.Er EPIPE .
.Pp
The receiving socket will acknowledge any received data.
If no acknowledgement is received in a timely manner, the transmitting socket
will transmit the data again.
If a acknowledgement still isn't received after a while, the connection is
considered broken and no further receipt or transmission is possible.
.Pp
The condition of the socket can be tested with
.Xr poll 2
where
.Dv POLLIN
signifies new data been received or the remote socket has shut down for writing
or an incoming connection can be retrieved with
.Xr accept 2 ,
.Dv POLLOUT
signifies new data can be sent now (and the socket is not shut down for
writing),
.Dv POLLHUP
signifies the socket is shut down for writing, and
.Dv POLLERR
signifies an asynchronous error is pending.
.Pp
The connection can be shut down with
.Xr shutdown 2
in either the reading direction (discarding further received data) or the
writing direction (which sends the finish control flag).
The connection is closed when both sockets have sent and acknowledged the finish
control flag.
Upon the
.Xr close 2
of the last file descriptor for a connected socket, the socket is shut down in
both directions.
.Pp
Socket options can be set with
.Xr setsockopt 2
and read with
.Xr getsockopt 2
and exist on the
.Dv IPPROTO_TCP
level as well as applicable underlying protocol levels.
.Sh SOCKET OPTIONS
TCP sockets support these
.Xr setsockopt 2 /
.Xr getsockopt 2
options at level
.Dv SOL_SOCKET :
.Bl -tag -width "12345678"
.It Dv SO_BINDTODEVICE Fa "char[]"
Bind to a network interface by its name.
(Described in
.Xr if 4 )
.It Dv SO_BINDTOINDEX Fa "unsigned int"
Bind to a network interface by its index number.
(Described in
.Xr if 4 )
.It Dv SO_DEBUG Fa "int"
Whether the socket is in debug mode.
This option is not implemented and is initially 0.
Attempting to set it to non-zero will fail with
.Er EPERM .
(Described in
.Xr if 4 )
.It Dv SO_DOMAIN Fa "sa_family_t"
The socket
.Fa domain
(the address family).
This option can only be read.
(Described in
.Xr if 4 )
.It Dv SO_ERROR Fa "int"
The asynchronous pending error
(an
.Xr errno 3
value).
Errors are permanent.
This option can only be read.
(Described in
.Xr if 4 )
.It Dv SO_PROTOCOL Fa "int"
The socket protocol
.Dv ( IPPROTO_TCP ) .
This option can only be read.
(Described in
.Xr if 4 )
.It Dv SO_RCVBUF Fa "int"
How many bytes the receive queue can use (default is 64 KiB).
(Described in
.Xr if 4 )
.It Dv SO_REUSEADDR Fa "int"
Whether binding to the any address on a port doesn't conflict with binding to
another address and the same port, if both sockets have this option set and the
user binding the second socket is the same that bound the first socket or the
user binding the second socket has superuser privileges.
(Described in
.Xr if 4 )
.It Dv SO_SNDBUF Fa "int"
How many bytes the send queue can use (default is 64 KiB).
(Described in
.Xr if 4 )
.It Dv SO_TYPE Fa "int"
The socket type
.Dv ( SOCK_STREAM ) .
This option can only be read.
(Described in
.Xr if 4 )
.El
.Pp
TCP sockets currently implement no
.Xr setsockopt 2 /
.Xr getsockopt 2
options at level
.Dv IPPROTO_TCP .
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
Connections time out when a segment has not been acknowledged by the remote
socket after 6 attempts to deliver the segment.
Each retransmission happens after 1 second plus 1 second per failed
transmissions so far.
Successful delivery of any segment resets the retransmission count to 0.
.Pp
The receive and transmission buffers are both 64 KiB by default.
.Pp
If no specific port is requested, one is randomly selected in the dynamic port
range 32768 (inclusive) through 61000 (exclusive).
.Pp
The Maximum Segment Lifetime (MSL) is set to 30 seconds and the quiet time of
two MSLs before reusing sockets is 60 seconds.
.Sh ERRORS
Socket operations can fail due to these error conditions, in addition to the
error conditions of the network and link layer, and the error conditions of the
invoked function.
.Bl -tag -width [EADDRNOTAVAIL]
.It Bq Er EADDRINUSE
The socket cannot be bound to the requested address and port because another
socket was already bound to 1) the same address and port 2) the any address
and the same port (and
.Dv SO_REUSEADDR
was not set on both sockets), or 3) some address and the same port but the
requested address was the any address (and
.Dv SO_REUSEADDR
was not set on both sockets).
.It Bq Er EADDRNOTAVAIL
The socket cannot be bound to the requested address because no network interface
had that address or broadcast address.
.It Bq Er EADDRNOTAVAIL
The socket was connected to port 0.
.It Bq Er EAGAIN
A port could not be assigned because each port in the dynamic port range had
already been bound to a socket in a conflicting manner.
.It Bq Er ECONNREFUSED
The destination host refused the connection.
.It Bq Er ECONNRESET
The connection was reset by the remote socket.
.It Bq Er EHOSTDOWN
The destination host is not up.
This error can happen asynchronously.
.It Bq Er EHOSTUNREACH
The destination host was unreachable.
This error can happen asynchronously.
.It Bq Er ENETDOWN
The network interface isn't up.
This error can happen asynchronously.
.It Bq Er ENETUNREACH
The destination network was unreachable.
This error can happen asynchronously.
.It Bq Er ENETUNREACH
The remote address could not be connected because there was no route from the
local address to the remote address.
.It Bq Er ENOBUFS
There was not enough memory available for network packets.
.It Bq Er EPERM
The unimplemented
.Dv SO_DEBUG
socket options was attempted to be set to a non-zero value.
.It Bq Er EPIPE
The transmission failed because the connection is broken.
The
.Dv SIGPIPE
signal is sent as well unless disabled.
.It Bq Er ETIMEDOUT
The connection timed out delivering a segment.
This error can happen asynchronously.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr accept 2 ,
.Xr bind 2 ,
.Xr connect 2 ,
.Xr getpeername 2 ,
.Xr getsockname 2 ,
.Xr getsockopt 2 ,
.Xr poll 2 ,
.Xr recv 2 ,
.Xr recvfrom 2 ,
.Xr recvmsg 2 ,
.Xr send 2 ,
.Xr sendmsg 2 ,
.Xr sendto 2 ,
.Xr setsockopt 2 ,
.Xr shutdown 2 ,
.Xr socket 2 ,
.Xr if 4 ,
.Xr inet 4 ,
.Xr ip 4 ,
.Xr kernel 7
.Sh STANDARDS
.Rs
.%A J. Postel (ed.)
.%D September 1981
.%R STD 7
.%R RFC 793
.%T Transmission Control Protocol
.%Q USC/Information Sciences Institute
.Re
.Pp
.Rs
.%A Internet Engineering Task Force
.%A R. Braden (ed.)
.%D October 1989
.%R STD 3
.%R RFC 1122
.%T Requirements for Internet Hosts -- Communication Layers
.%Q USC/Information Sciences Institute
.Re
.Pp
.St -p1003.1-2008 specifies the TCP socket programming interface.
.Sh BUGS
The implementation is incomplete and has known bugs.
.Pp
Out-of-band data is not yet supported and is ignored on receipt.
.Pp
The round trip time is not estimated which prevents efficient retransmission
when data is lost.
Retransmissions happen after a second, which means unnecessary retransmissions
happen if the round trip time is more than a second.
.Pp
Options are not supported and are ignored on receipt.
.Pp
No extensions are implemented yet that improve efficiency for long fast networks
with large bandwidth * delay products.
.Pp
There is not yet any support for sending keep-alive packets.
.Pp
There is not yet any support for respecting
.Xr icmp 4
condition such as destination unreachable or source quench.
.Pp
Half-open connections use memory, but until the handshake is complete, it is not
confirmed whether the remote is actually able to transmit from the source
qaddress.
An attacker may be able to transmit many packets from forged addresses,
reaching the limit on pending TCP sockets in the listen queue and thus deny
service to further legitimate connections.
A SYN queue or SYN cookies would mitigate this problem, but neither is yet
implemented.
.Pp
.Xr bind 2
does not yet enforce that binding to a well-known port (port 1 through port
1023) requires superuser privileges.
.Pp
The automatic assignment of ports is random, but is statistically biased.
A random port is picked, and if it is taken, the search sequentially iterates
ports in ascending order until an available port is found or the search
terminates.
